
--- PAGE 1 ---


--- PAGE 2 ---


--- PAGE 3 ---


--- PAGE 4 ---


--- PAGE 5 ---


--- PAGE 6 ---


--- PAGE 7 ---


--- PAGE 8 ---


--- PAGE 9 ---


--- PAGE 10 ---


--- PAGE 11 ---


--- PAGE 12 ---


--- PAGE 13 ---
Gerald D. Hebert. II (10/22/2025 16:19:27 CDT)
Gerald D. Hebert. II
Gerald D. Hebert. II
CEO
Carrie Lindon
VP, Procurement


--- PAGE 14 ---
EXHIBIT A 
SCOPE OF WORK 
All capitalized terms not otherwise defined in this SOW will have the meanings assigned to them in the 
Agreement.  Unless modified herein, all terms in the Agreement shall remain unchanged and in full force 
and effect. 
 
A. OWNER SEGMENT(S) RECEIVING SERVICES: 
 
Enterprise Real Estate Services 
 
B. PURPOSE AND GENERAL SCOPE OF SERVICES: 
The Owner manages a large, complex real estate portfolio consisting of administrative, clinical, and 
OptumRx/ pharmacy fulfillment. Most projects completed by the Owner are tenant improvements 
with scopes ranging from new sites to remodeling and refreshing. Owner has well-defined programs, 
standards and design guidelines which form the basis of the design approach for most projects (the 
“Program Guidelines”). 
1. The Owner expects to deploy a delivery model that utilizes a party (the “Architect of 
Record”) to provide Design Services related to the implementation of the Owner’s 
Program Guidelines during standard project delivery. The Architect of Record will 
coordinate with Design Experience to understand and deploy the Owner’s Program 
Guidelines, processes, and procedures. 
2. Architect will be responsible for the delivery of professional design services (the 
“Design Services”) to support the further development, maintenance and 
implementation of the Program Guidelines or as directed and approved by the 
Owner or its Designated Representative (as defined in this SOW) in non-standard 
applications. 
3. At the direction of the Owner, the Architect will provide management, oversight and 
execution for the detailed design services listed below.   
i. 
Architect shall assign appropriate resources to oversee the management of the 
Owner’s account and the Owner’s projects.  Resources assigned to support the 
Owner’s projects shall have extensive knowledge of the Architect processes and 
services and extensive knowledge of the Owner’s standards, design guidelines, 
project management processes, and administrative requirements.    
ii. 
The Architect shall assign personnel to support the Owner’s projects.   Architect ‘s 
personnel shall be responsible for the day-to-day management of the Architect 
obligations as they related to the Owner’s projects.  
4. Architect Services may include, but are not limited to, any or all the following phases: 
Project Initiation, Programming, Planning, Design (Preliminary Floor Plans, Design 
Development, 
Construction 
Documents) 
Procurement/Bidding, 
Construction 
Administration & Occupancy, Close Out and Post- Occupancy/Warranty Site Visit. 
Project will be categorized by the following types: New Sites, Remodels, Infrastructure 
projects and Restack/Refresh. See [Appendix A, Definitions] attached hereto for 
definitions of each project type. Projects may also have the following ancillary services: 
Additional Space Plans, Consultant Services and Coordination, and Field 
Measurements / Site Visits. Firm will also provide, host, or manage certain aspects of 
technology products and services to support Owner's design delivery and space 
information management functions and processes. 
5. Non-Direct Project Design Costs   
This section defines the tasks and responsibilities essential to the successful execution of 
multiple projects for the Owner but not directly attributable to the design and 


--- PAGE 15 ---
documentation of any single project. These activities support project efficiency, 
compliance, and continuous improvement. The Architect acknowledges that these 
activities are part of standard business operations and will not result in additional fees to 
the Owner. The Owner and Architect agree to the following provisions to ensure cost 
transparency and eliminate unnecessary fees.  The Architect agrees that the activities 
listed below are integral to ensuring firm and project success, efficiency, and compliance 
across multiple projects. As such, these costs and all client relationship management 
activities are considered part of the standard cost of doing business and shall not result 
in additional fees to the Owner unless explicitly agreed upon in writing for specialized 
consulting services beyond standard practice. 
a. Program-Level Coordination & Administrative Support  
The Architect shall participate in program-wide meetings and other efforts necessary 
for project execution, including but not limited to:   
i. 
Multi-Project Coordination Meetings – Regular discussions with the Owner 
to align project schedules, risk management strategies, and resource 
allocation.   
ii. 
Lessons Learned Meetings – Structured evaluations after project 
completion to document successes, challenges, and areas for 
improvement.   
iii. 
Process Improvement & Standardization – Collaboration with the Owner 
to enhance workflows, templates, and documentation standards for 
greater efficiency.   
iv. 
Trend Identification & Data Analysis – Monitoring industry advancements 
and Owner-specific project performance to refine long-term strategies.   
v. 
Pilot Program Development & Implementation – Assisting in evaluating 
and testing new design methodologies or technologies that may benefit 
future projects.   
b. Regulatory, Compliance & Contract Support   
The Architect is responsible for ensuring all project designs adhere to applicable 
codes and regulations, including but not limited to:   
i. 
Ongoing Compliance Reviews – Continuous monitoring of code changes and 
regulatory requirements to maintain project compliance.   
ii. 
Multi-Project Code Interpretation & Application – Ensuring uniform 
application of building codes, zoning laws, and Owner-specific regulations.   
iii. 
Contract Updates & Refinements– Advising on necessary adjustments to 
Owner-Architect agreements to reflect regulatory or operational changes.   
iv. 
Permitting & Entitlement Strategy – Supporting the Owner in navigating 
permitting requirements while ensuring consistency across projects.   
c. Firm-Wide & Owner-Specific Training   
The Architect shall maintain proficiency in all Owner-mandated procedures, 
software, and compliance requirements, including but not limited to:   
i. Owner-Specific Training & Knowledge Sharing– Participation in necessary 
training sessions to align with Owner expectations and project protocols.   
ii. Software & Technology Adoption – Familiarity with required project 
management platforms, digital design tools, and collaborative software.   
iii. Regulatory & Industry Training – Continuing education to ensure 
adherence to current industry standards and best practices.   
d. Internal Quality Assurance & Reporting  
To maintain accuracy and efficiency across projects, the Architect shall:   
i. Conduct Internal Quality Control Reviews – Implement a peer review 
process to uphold design accuracy and compliance.   


--- PAGE 16 ---
ii. Track Project Trends & Performance Metrics – Maintain project 
performance data to identify recurring challenges and process 
improvements.   
iii. Provide Reporting & Program Oversight – Submit periodic reports detailing 
project efficiency, risk assessments, and execution trends.   
e. Administrative & Miscellaneous Costs 
The Architect shall not charge additional fees for standard administrative functions, 
including:   
i. Meeting Attendance– Participation in required Owner meetings, industry 
best practice discussions, and administrative check-ins.   
ii. Proposal Preparations  
iii. Document Reproduction & Digital Archiving – Ensuring digital records are 
maintained and made accessible at no additional cost post-project.   
iv. Legal & Contract Review Fees – Providing necessary contract updates and 
compliance support without additional charges.   
v. Expedited Work & Overtime Fees – Managing project timelines effectively 
without hidden rush fees unless a formally approved acceleration request 
is made.   
vi. Reimbursable Expense Management – Travel, printing, and 
shipping costs shall be minimized, with all reimbursable expenses 
requiring pre-approval.   
vii. Owner’s project related capital forecasting and year-end work in 
progress accrual process according to Owner’s policies and 
procedures. 
viii. Project re-starts following a duration of less than the term of the 
agreement. 
ix. Schedule extensions during the design phase or construction 
phase (if less than 2 months and undue to project being put on 
hold or delayed start of construction). 
 
f. This SOW and SLA’s and KPI’s, defined below, are designed to enhance workplace 
functionality, improve patient and staff comfort, and align with the Owner’s branding 
and design standards.  
C. DEFINITIONS:   
The terms defined in Exhibit C shall have the meanings set forth below whenever they appear in 
this Agreement, unless (a) the context in which they are used clearly requires a different 
meaning; or (b) a different definition is described for a particular Section or provision 
 
 
D. DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF SERVICES 
4.1 Regional Architect 
The Architect is responsible for delivering professional design services, managing project design 
execution, ensuring compliance with standards and regulations, coordinating with various 
stakeholders, and providing ongoing support throughout the project lifecycle. 
A. Objectives:  
1. 
Develop and implement design strategies aligned with business objectives 
2. 
Design utilizing current best practices in healthcare and administrative environments. 
3. 
Innovate through partnership with Design Experience and the Innovation and Strategic 
Design Architectural Partner to pilot programs and living lab environments 


--- PAGE 17 ---
4. 
Support the Design Experience team in providing recommendations to support the 
evolution of the UHG design guidelines and ensure scalability across the portfolio. 
5. 
Produce designs that enhance operational performance, user experience, and 
sustainability goals 
B. Delivery:  The Architect shall deliver Projects as required by the Agreement and described 
herein: 
1. Ensure designs and specifications adhere to the Owner’s standards and intention in 
accordance with the Architect’s Responsibilities outlined in Section 4.2.  Architect shall 
provide Owner with change recommendations, designed to maximize cost savings, 
where appropriate.    
2. Ensure that sufficient discussions of the project location and scope have been 
completed to ensure proposal accuracy and complete the design and delivery of all 
services.  Such verification may include but is not limited to:   
a) Arrange site visits and verify critical as-built dimensions to ensure accurate 
layouts and quantity take offs   
b) Coordinate with Design Experience, its appointed Project Manager and other 
stakeholders for each project, and other Alliance Partners and contractors for 
the project.    
c) The account team shall be responsible for tracking and reporting progress on 
all projects from the time that a proposal request is received to the time that 
the project is delivered all deficiency list items are resolved, and closeout 
completion has occurred.   
 
4.2 ARCHITECT’S RESPONSIBILITIES  
The Architect shall: 
A. Effectively work with the Owner and the Owner’s Alliance Partners to motivate and establish 
buy-in of the Design Guidelines, new technology, new products, and new industry standards 
(and trends) to successfully improve processes and design. 
B. To the extent requested and identified by the Owner, employ applicable Owner- identified “Six 
Sigma” methods and tools in connection with the Project. 
C. Embrace and actively support the Quadruple Aim. Reporting is based on 
support of the Quadruple Aim. 
D. Be aware of Owner’s Enterprise Sustainability goals and work with Owner or Designated 
Representative to include sustainable design features and initiatives as applicable. Green Building 
Rating Systems/building certification may or may not be required for specific projects. 
 
4.2.1 The Architect shall submit for the Owner's approval a schedule for the performance of the 
Architect's services, and the services of Owner provided consultants, which initially shall be 
consistent with the time periods established in SLA Exhibit and which shall be adjusted by mutual 
written agreement, if necessary, as the project proceeds.  This schedule shall include allowances for 
periods of time required for Owner's review, the performance of the Owners consultants, and for 
approval of submissions by authorities having jurisdiction over the Project.  Time limits established 
by the schedule approved by the Owner shall not, except for reasonable cause, be exceeded by the 
Architect or the Owner. 
 
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the duties of the Architect as set 
forth herein shall at no time be diminished in any way by reasons of any approval by or consent 
of the Owner with respect to the requirements of applicable building and health codes and 
standards of normally enforced in the location and at the time of the project construction, nor 
shall the Architect be released from any responsibility by reason thereof. 


--- PAGE 18 ---
B. All Construction Documents shall be stamped by an Architect duly registered and in good 
standing under all applicable registration and licensing laws in the state in which the Project is 
located. 
C. The Architect shall furnish efficient administration and management of the design, contract 
administration, and other aspects of the Project for which it is responsible hereunder to the 
Owner 
D. Architect shall, at its sole expense, correct any errors or omissions in the Instruments of Service 
as soon as the Architect becomes aware of such errors or omissions or is notified of such errors 
or omissions.  Should the Architect refuse or neglect to correct such errors or omissions 
promptly after receiving notice requesting such remedial work and it is then reasonably 
practicable for such remedial work to be performed, then the Owner shall be entitled to correct 
such error or omissions in the Instruments of Service at the reasonable expense of the Architect.  
The obligation of the Architect is in addition to, and not in substitution for, any other remedy for 
defective services which the Owner may have at law or in equity. Architect shall furnish all the 
plans, tools, materials, supplies, equipment, computers, and labor required to complete the 
services required hereunder and perform all its obligations hereunder. 
 
4.2.2 The Architect shall be responsible for coordination of all services provided hereunder whether 
such services are provided directly by the Architect or by any consultants hired by the Architect.   
A. All the services to be furnished by the Architect hereunder shall be in accordance with the 
current UHG design standards and guideline aspects of projects such as the Project as of the 
time the Architect begins preparing the Construction documents.  
B. The Architect shall perform a Clash Detection on the project. Architect shall verify that 
no two elements relating to structural, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical occupy the 
space and interfere with another, and all equipment and furniture coordinates with the 
construction documents to ensure complete coordination. 
C. The Architect shall retain the consultants required for achieving project requirements. 
D. Architect's Consultants.  The Architect and the Owner acknowledge and agree that the intent of 
this Agreement is to delegate to the Architect, and have the Architect assume full responsibility 
for the coordination of all architectural and engineering design services required by the 
disciplines listed in the Service Agreement for the Project, except for the design services 
otherwise expressly provided herein.  The Architect shall continue to assist the Owner in a 
reasonable manner in resolving the dispute with the Architect's consultant.  The Architect shall 
retain, at its sole expense, all architectural, engineering, and other design consultants required 
for the Architect to fulfill such design service responsibilities as reasonably determined by the 
Owner and the contract to be entered into by and between the Architect and each such 
consultant shall be subject to the prior written approval thereof by the Owner, which approval 
shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed 
1. For Clean Room projects, the Architect shall work with the Owner’s designated MEP 
Consultant firm.  See Exhibit G 
2. The Owner reserves the right to select and establish consultants for the Architect to 
work with. The Architect shall coordinate with these consultants as directed by the 
Owner to ensure the successful completion of the project. The Architect's special talent, 
training and experience cause it to be the lead professional on the Project with the 
ultimate responsibility for all architectural and engineering services rendered in 
connection with the Project. 
 
4.2.3 Architect’s Basic Services  
Services not set forth in this section are Supplemental or Additional Services. 
A. The Architect shall manage the Architect’s services, research applicable design criteria, attend 
Project meetings, communicate with members of the Project team, and report progress to the 
Owner.  


--- PAGE 19 ---
B. The Architect shall perform any design and other services that are normally or customarily 
furnished and reasonably necessary for the Project. 
C. The Architect shall coordinate its services and design with those services provided by the Owner 
and the Owner’s consultants. The Architect shall be entitled to rely on, and shall not be 
responsible for, the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of, services and information 
furnished by the Owner and the Owner’s consultants. The Architect shall provide prompt 
written notice to the Owner if the Architect becomes aware of any error, omission, or 
inconsistency in such services or information. 
1. The Owner’s consultants include but are not limited to: 
• 
Furniture 
• 
Flooring 
• 
Sound Masking 
• 
Artwork/Branding 
• 
Security (Owner internal and Business teams) 
• 
Audio Visual 
• 
Signage 
• 
Medical Equipment 
• 
IT/Technology/Low Voltage (Owner internal and Business teams) 
• 
Storefront Systems 
• 
Food Service 
D.  As soon as practicable after the date of the Service Agreement, the Architect shall submit for 
the Owner’s approval a schedule for the performance of the Architect’s services complying 
with the Owner’s preliminary schedule. The schedule initially shall include anticipated dates for 
the commencement of construction and for Substantial Completion of the Work as set forth in 
the Initial Information. The schedule shall include allowances for periods of time required for 
the Owner’s review, for the performance of the Owner’s consultants, and for approval of 
submissions by authorities having jurisdiction over the Project. Once approved by the Owner, 
time limits established by the schedule shall not, except for reasonable cause, be exceeded by 
the Architect or Owner. With the Owner’s approval, the Architect shall adjust the schedule, if 
necessary, as the Project proceeds until the commencement of construction. 
E. Engagement of Services 
1. The Architect shall provide an individual Service Order for each project to the 
Owner or its Designated Representative. The Service Order will indicate project-
specific scope of services, compensation, and schedule for performing the 
services.  
2. Receipt of a Purchase Order (PO) provided by the Owner or its Designated 
Representative will act as authorization to proceed with Design Services for a 
specific project.  
3. Changes to the Service Order and PO may be made by the Owner at any time. 
Scope, fees and schedules for individual work efforts shall be coordinated with the 
Owner or its Designated Representative. 
F. Project Schedule.  The Project Schedule shall be a detailed schedule for all the design and 
construction matters for the entire Project and shall be prepared by the Owner with active 
participation by the Architect, including consulting, research, review, and comment on draft 
schedules and attendance at meetings as reasonably requested by the Owner.  'At least once 
per month during the Project’s design phase, and additionally as reasonably requested by the 
Owner, the Architect shall provide an update to the Design Schedule." The Architect shall 
periodically advise the Owner of the status of the Project in relation to the Project Schedule and 
promptly notify the Owner in writing in the event that, to the best of the Architect's knowledge, 
information, and belief, the Work is not proceeding in accordance with the then Project 
Schedule approved in writing by the Owner, including, without limitation, (i) the progress of the 


--- PAGE 20 ---
Work being behind such schedule, (ii) any delay in the critical path of construction of the Project 
and (iii) the Work being performed out of sequence with such schedule. 
1. The Design Milestone Dates are the dates by which the Architect shall be obligated to 
complete each phase of its design services for each building or other segment of the 
Project and are a component of the Design Schedule.  The Architect acknowledges and 
agrees that performing its services in accordance with the Design Milestone Dates is 
important to the timing and success of the overall Project.   
2. In the event that the Architect fails to complete any phase of its design services on or 
before one of the Design Milestone Dates or the Owner reasonably determines at any 
time that the Architect is unable to accelerate its services so that it shall, within thirty 
(30) days thereafter, be in compliance with the Design Milestone Dates as reasonable 
determined by the Owner, the Architect shall be deemed to be in default hereunder to 
the extent caused by the acts or omissions of the Architect and not the acts or omissions 
of the Owner, the Contractor or others for whom the Architect is not responsible 
hereunder. 
3. The Owner shall have the right to make reasonable adjustments to the foregoing 
schedule in a matter not inconsistent with the Design Milestone Dates or the Project 
Schedule to allow for so-called "fast tracking" of all or any portion of the Project, 
whereby certain items shall be designed and under construction while the remainder of 
the Project is being designed, by giving written notice thereof to the Architect.  Multiple 
drawing packages to meet business requirements are typical and shall be agreed upon 
by the Owner and Architect in preparation of the Service Order.  
1. If such adjustments are identified after the Service Order has been executed and 
require significant out-of-sequence work to be performed by the Architect and such 
work necessitates the Architect to perform significantly more services than would 
otherwise have been required, the Architect's compensation shall be adjusted only 
if the Owner provides explicit written approval for such changes as a Change in 
Service under Section 3.3 herein. Adjustments to fee will not be accepted for fast 
tracking due to Architect’s delay. 
G. The Architect shall, at appropriate times, and with specific written consent of the Owner, 
contact governmental authorities required to approve the Construction Documents and 
entities providing utility services to the Project. The Architect shall respond to applicable design 
requirements imposed by those authorities and entities. 
H. The Architect shall assist the Owner, if requested in writing by the Owner, in connection with 
the Owner’s responsibility for filing documents required for the approval of governmental 
authorities having jurisdiction over the Project. 
I. 
Upon request of the Owner, the Architect shall make a presentation to explain the design of 
the Project to representatives of the Owner. 
J. The Architect shall submit design documents to the Owner at intervals appropriate to the 
design process for purposes of evaluation and approval by the Owner.  The Architect shall be 
entitled to rely on approvals received from the Owner in the further development of the 
design. 
K. The Architect shall provide graphic representations and immersive tools to convey design intent, 
materiality, and spatial experience. The renderings shall conform to the most current design 
guidelines approved by Owner and the quality to be agreed upon. These shall include: 
Baseline Visualization (Basic Services): 
• 
3D modeling using Revit or equivalent BIM software. 
• 
Real-time rendering using Enscape, Lumion, or Twinmotion. 
• 
Static and animated renderings of key spaces. 
• 
Presentation materials using Adobe Creative Suite. 
• 
QR code or web-linked 3D views for stakeholder access. 


--- PAGE 21 ---
The need for additional high-definition renderings, immersive walkthroughs, or simulation tools 
shall be determined collaboratively by the Owner or Designated Representative and provided 
by the Architect, based on project complexity, stakeholder needs, and communication goals as 
additional services.  
Enhanced Visualization 
• 
Virtual Reality walkthroughs using Meta Quest, HTC Vive, or equivalent. 
• 
Scan-to-BIM for existing conditions and renovation projects. 
• 
Photorealistic renderings using V-Ray, Unreal Engine, or equivalent. 
• 
Live simulation modeling for flow, adjacency, and operational testing. 
Enhanced Change Management Visualization (for projects with high user impact): 
• 
XR-enabled mockups and task-based simulations. 
• 
AI-assisted design tools for rapid iteration and scenario testing. 
• 
Video-guided virtual mockups and survey-based feedback tools. 
• 
Change management collateral including storyboards and infographics. 
L. All design and project deliverables shall be produced using Revit Software. The Revit software 
version shall be no older than 2 years from the most currently issued software version. The 
Revit files shall be completed using Owner’s standards for layers, families, line thickness, level 
of design (LOD 300 minimum) and naming conventions as provided by Owner or its Designated 
Representative. Refer to Exhibit J- Drawing Management. 
M. The Architect shall work within the scope of work, the schedule, and budget and within the fees 
of their Service Order  
N. The Architect will follow all standards as set forth in the most current Program Guidelines and 
the processes listed in the exhibits attached hereto. 
O. The Architect shall provide deliverables even when requested out of sequence. 
P. The Architect shall work with the Owner’s Designated Representative to determine the project 
deliverables based on the scope of work.  
 
4.2.3.1 Feasibility Stage 
Feasibility services entail the gathering, organizing and reporting of high-level information to be 
used in determining the necessary space requirements to satisfy site specific Business needs. If 
engaged during feasibility stage, the Architect will work with the Owner’s Occupancy Planners 
and Design Experience. 
A. Feasibility Kick off 
1. Review with Owner or Designated Representative the Business’s project scope of work, 
budget, and schedule. Services for this phase include a review of all internal kick-off 
documents provided by the Owner or Designated Representative and attendance at 
meetings. Review includes but is not limited to the project site, Summary of 
Requirements, budget scope assumptions, and schedule provided by Owner or 
Designated Representative. 
B. Feasibility Scope Internal Interview:  
1. High-level programming discussion will entail gathering of information about 
Business operations, staff requirements, growth, critical adjacencies, special space 
and technology needs, team spaces, support spaces, amenities, and potential 
exceptions to Owner’s Guidelines. 
C. Preliminary Program 
1. The Architect shall prepare a preliminary evaluation of the Owner’s program, schedule, 
budget for the Cost of the Work, Project site, the proposed procurement and delivery 
method, and other Initial Information, each in terms of the other, to ascertain the 
requirements of the Project. The Architect shall notify the Owner or Designated 
Representative of (1) any inconsistencies discovered in the information, (2) other 
information or consulting services that may be reasonably needed for the Project (3) 


--- PAGE 22 ---
Provide a programming strategy plan to the Owner or Designated Representative. 
D. Scenario Development:  
1. 
The Architect shall create a high-level program using a Square Foot calculator to 
estimate square footage requirements for each of the scenarios agreed upon with 
the Owner or Designated Representative. 
2. The Architect shall provide recommendations and align with the Owner or 
Designated Representative on design solutions that will support the Owner’s 
Business scope of work, budget, and schedule. 
E. Utilization analyses 
1. The Architect may be requested to analyze existing utilization data provided by the 
Owner or Designated Representative, including but not limited to badge access data, 
EMR, and patient visits. At the discretion and approval of the Owner or Designated 
Representative, the Architect may conduct a site visit to gather information on how 
the existing facility operates, how space is utilized, and how the facility is staffed in 
order to assist in determining the space program needed for a project.  
F. If Owner or its Designated Representative chooses to provide the feasibility stage services 
via in-house resources, Owner or its Designated Representative will provide the Architect of 
Record with any necessary project background and scope information required to complete 
the Design Services such as summary of requirements, High level Program, Facility Condition 
Assessment, Test Fit, and project schedule assumptions. 
 
4.2.3.2 Schematic Design Phase Services 
The Architect of Record will prepare schematic design documents to describe basic design 
concepts for the project (“Schematic Design Documents”). Close coordination with Design 
Experience and Occupancy Planning is expected. 
A. Site Due Diligence Refer to MBBI Examples provided  
With the assistance of the Owner or Designated Representative, the Architect and the 
Architect's consultant(s) will conduct a thorough investigation of the site and existing 
conditions to confirm the accuracy of documents provided by the Owner or Designated 
Representative as Record Documents and to identify undocumented conditions.  Due to 
constraints of the existing condition, no guarantee or warranty is given or implied by the 
Architect and the Architect's consultant(s) that by this investigation, or from the conclusions 
drawn from this investigation, that unique or undiscovered conditions that may affect the 
Work remain undetected. However, the survey, validation and creation, if necessary, of 
measured drawings are expected to be thorough and complete.  
1. The need for and quantity of field measurement visits and creation of Site Due 
Diligence Reports will be determined by the Owner or Designated Representative 
with the Architect.  
2. Field measurement services include a survey to evaluate the existing physical 
conditions including,  but not limited to: zoning compliance for use, exterior 
building envelope, structural elements, demising walls, interior partitions, 
plumbing, mechanical, electrical, and fire monitoring, and/or suppression systems, 
existing site utilities, Americans With Disabilities Act as amended (“ADA”) for 
accessibility within the tenant space along with the path of travel from the 
handicap parking spaces and public right of way, life safety code issues, overall 
condition of the space, including ceiling, millwork, interior finishes, glazing and 
overall assessment of site to meet Owner’s programmatic requirements. 
3. The Architect and the Architect’s consultants shall make all necessary visits to the 
proposed site(s) to 
a) confirm that existing documents accurately reflect existing conditions. 
b) If there are no existing drawings, the Architect shall field measure all 
existing conditions. The efforts of field measuring existing conditions will 


--- PAGE 23 ---
be completed as an Additional Service 3D scanning services / digital 
imaging can be used as a tool to capture existing conditions upon approval 
from the Owner or Designated Representative. 
4. The Architect shall develop a Site Due Diligence Report with narratives, which 
outlines for each site the scope of work and the Architect shall assist the Owner or 
Designated Representative Project Manager to determine costs associated with 
the site to allow for the design and construction to meet the Owner’s 
programmatic requirements. 
a) The report must be completed using the current issued Site Due Diligence 
Checklist form. 
b) Field measurements shall be accurate within a variance of 2% or less per 
BOMA 2012 standards. 
c) The Architect shall develop a CAD/REVIT file of the existing conditions  
5. When base building CAD/REVIT files of the planned location do not comply with 
Owner standards, Architect may be directed by Owner or Designated 
Representative to update the documents to comply with Owner standards for 
CAD/REVIT files. Efforts to complete and coordinate scope will be completed as an 
Additional Service.  Inclusion in a project requires Sr. Director of Design Experience 
written approval. 
6. If it is deemed that the existing hard copy or electronic plans are materially 
inaccurate and will require field measurements, the Owner or Designated 
Representative may request the Architect to field verify measurements. Efforts to 
complete and coordinate scope will be completed as an Additional Service. 
a) These items are to be measured in the field and documented as the 
current condition of a given space in relation to an existing base floor 
plan, to be provided by Owner or Designated Representative, and used 
to establish such factors as amount/extent of required demolition, 
feasibility of proposed design, capacity of a given space in accordance 
with AIA standards and local code restrictions.  
b) 3D scanning services / digital imaging can be used as a tool to capture 
existing conditions upon approval from the Owner or Designated 
Representative and shall be identified on the AIA 221-2018 Service 
Agreement under Article 2.1.2  
7. Field Measurement and Site Due Diligence Report services will be outlined in the 
Service Order Section 2.1.2 Supplemental and Additional Services to be approved by 
the Owner or Designated Representative. The Service Order should include an 
estimate for travel time and reimbursable expenses. 
B. 
Detailed Programming 
The Architect shall review the program and other information furnished by the Owner or 
Designated Representative, and shall review laws, codes, and regulations applicable to the 
Architect’s services. In some cases, detailed programming may not be required by the 
project, or a “Programming Lite” may be warranted.  Consultation with the Owner and 
Designated Representatives to align intended scope, schedule and budget for Service Order 
preparation is required. 
i. 
The Architect, with the assistance of the Owner or Designated Representative, through 
interviews with the Owner's staff and other groups as determined necessary by the 
Owner or Designated Representative, shall finalize the project program defining the 
Work, utilizing the UHG Guidelines. Programming Services will include gathering 
organizing and reporting of detailed information about Business operations, staff 
requirements, growth, critical adjacencies, special space and technology needs, team 
spaces, support space needs and amenities, and potential exceptions to Owner’s Guidelines 
to be used in determining the necessary space requirements to satisfy site specific 
business needs. The Owner or Designated Representative may provide programming 


--- PAGE 24 ---
information relating to services, organization’s operation, staff requirements, growth, 
critical adjacencies, special space and technology needs, team spaces, support space 
needs and amenities, and potential exceptions to Owner’s Guidelines. The Architect shall 
use this information to further develop and verify the Program. 
a) identify issues and facts that pertain to the Project that will affect its 
development and execution, 
b) determine required spaces, their relationships to one another, their desired 
sizes and the specific needs for each space if contrary to the Owner’s standard 
program 
c) set forth a conceptual plan to illustrate the special organization and flow, and 
to confirm the project size and complexity, 
d) develop flow diagrams to support optimized experience and efficiencies 
e) further develop concepts for organization and layout of the spaces, 
f) develop a Project Design Schedule, including Phasing Strategy for execution of 
the design work in support of the Owner’s Project schedule. 
g) Discuss Program Summary prepared by the Architect with Owner’s Business, 
review all other changes and align with the Owner and Designated 
Representative on scope, budget, and schedule. 
h) The Architect will prepare a Program Summary Document for review and 
approval by the Owner or Designated Representative. 
i) 
Finalize Program Summary, provide Neighborhood & Adjacency Plans, 
stacking and block plans as required per project scope and review all other 
changes made with Owner’s Business for final approval prior to moving into 
the Schematic Design phase. 
j) The Architect shall present its preliminary evaluation to the Owner or 
Designated Representative and shall discuss with the Owner alternative 
approaches to design and construction of the Project. The Architect 
shall reach an understanding with the Owner or Designated 
Representative regarding the requirements of the Project. 
Upon approval of the Program Summary Document the Architect can rely on the 
information as the directional basis for the Schematic Design phase Preliminary 
Floor Plan. 
C. The Architect shall review the approved preliminary program and other information 
furnished by the Owner, and shall review laws, codes, and regulations applicable to the 
Architect’s services, for the Project. 
D. Based on the Project requirements agreed upon with the Owner, the Architect shall prepare 
and present, for the Owner’s approval, preliminary floor plans illustrating the scale and 
relationship of the Project components along with site evaluation and planning as 
appropriate for the project scope. 
E. Based on the Owner’s approval of the preliminary design, the Architect shall prepare 
Schematic Design Documents for the Owner’s approval.  
The Schematic Design Documents shall consist of drawings and other documents depending 
on the agreed upon deliverable between Architect and Owner’s Designated Representative 
including a site plan, if appropriate, and preliminary building plans, sections and elevations; 
and may include some combination of study models, perspective sketches, or digital 
representations. Preliminary selections of major building systems and construction materials 
shall be noted on the drawings or described in writing. 
1. Preliminary Floor Plans shall match the level of detail included in the Preliminary Floor Plan 
deliverable expectation samples including but not limited to the following information: 
Title Block, north arrow, drawing date, Useable square feet, Rentable square feet, room 
names, room numbers, the approved space program chart. See Preliminary Floor Plan 
deliverable expectation samples  


--- PAGE 25 ---
a) For Administrative Projects, the Space Plan serves as a visual representation 
of the project scope and program and may be used internally by project team 
members to confirm budget and schedule estimates.   
b) The Space Plan shall include space design solutions, locations of furniture and 
equipment in unique or non-standard rooms, as well as a “typical” for each 
standard room type and workstation type. 
c) Each Space Plan will include a summary table of the program elements listing 
the various space types and quantities of each, total useable square feet per 
floor, rentable square feet per floor, number and size of workstations, offices 
and conference rooms, list of support spaces and other rooms, total seat 
count, density calculation (RSF per seat), identification of non-standard 
furniture product, power locations for systems furniture, doors that are to 
receive a card reader. 
d) Also included is a high-level assessment of the Space Plan for compliance with 
applicable jurisdictional codes and ADA requirements. 
i. 
For Administrative Projects, 1 In parallel with Space Planning, the 
Architect of Record will develop a floor plan to visually define 
neighborhood areas and the placement of business groups on the 
plan (the “Neighborhood and Adjacency Plan”). The final 
Neighborhood and Adjacency Plan will be based on the approved 
Space Plans 
2. The Architect acknowledges and agrees that the process of preparing Schematic Design 
Documents that are ultimately approved by the Owner may involve multiple revisions 
and drafts in the normal evolution of the design, cost estimating, and value engineering 
processes, all of which shall be included in the Architect's services hereunder and have 
been contemplated by the Architect in the Design Schedule and the Total Fee.  For 
example, the Schematic Design Documents may be tentatively finished, used as the 
basis for cost estimating, and then revised throughout the project for value engineering 
purposes as part of the Architect's services for the Total Fee hereunder. 
3. The Architect shall submit the Schematic Design Documents to the Owner and request 
the Owner’s approval. The Architect shall host a schematic design page turn meeting 
with the Owner, including relevant project representatives and must include Design 
Experience. 
F. The Architect shall consider sustainable design alternatives, such as material choices and 
building orientation, together with other considerations based on program and aesthetics, in 
developing a design that is consistent with the Owner’s program, schedule and budget for the 
Cost of the Work.  
G.  The Architect shall consider the value of alternative materials, building systems and equipment, 
together with other considerations based on program and aesthetics, in developing a design for 
the Project that is consistent with the Owner’s program, schedule, and budget for the Cost of the 
Work. 
H. Upon completion of the Preliminary Floor Plan the architect shall set up a review meeting with 
the Owner or Owner’s Designated Representative to walk through the layout and incorporate 
any feedback or changes prior to receiving approval. No Design Development work will occur 
until the Architect has received approval on the Preliminary Floor Plan. 
I. 
If the Owner delivers a written notice to the Architect stating that the Owner has approved the 
Schematic Design Documents, then the Architect shall proceed to prepare the Design 
Development Documents as required by Section 4.2.3.3 of this Agreement 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 26 ---
4.2.3.3 Design Development Phase Services  
A. Based on the Owner’s approval of the Schematic Design Documents, and on the Owner’s 
authorization of any adjustments in the Project requirements and the budget for the Cost of the 
Work, the Architect shall prepare Design Development Documents for the Owner’s approval. 
1. The Design Development Documents shall illustrate and describe the development of 
the approved Schematic Design Documents. The design documents shall be prepared to 
a level of detail adequate to obtain high level scope pricing for each project, as required 
by Owner or Designated Representative.   
2. The Design Development Set and MEP Narrative package will consist of all design 
documents required for high level scope pricing and including but not limited to: 
a) Specifications 
i. 
Draft outline of Architectural, Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing 
specification sections applicable to the project per current CSI 
MasterFormat divisions. 
b) Demolition Plan 
i. 
Depiction of conditions to remain or to be removed.  
ii. 
Any special conditions or general notes applicable to the specific 
project.  
c) Floor Plan  
i. 
Existing and/or new partition locations 
ii. 
Existing and/or new door locations 
iii. 
Millwork locations  
 
 
 
iv. 
Locations of furniture & medical equipment 
v. 
Room numbers  
vi. 
 Locations of fire-rated or special wall types  
d) Reflected Ceiling Plan 
i. 
Existing and/or new ceiling grid and lighting location  
ii. 
Above Finished Floor (AFF) dimensions 
iii. 
Coordination with furniture & medical equipment layout with proposed 
lighting layout 
iv. 
Audio Visual locations 
e) Furniture Plan 
i. 
Fixtures and furniture indicated to scale.  
ii. 
Schedules 
f) Finish Plan 
i. 
Indicate floor finish, wall finish, ceiling finish, and wall protection. 
ii. 
Indicate window treatments. 
iii. 
Schedules 
g) Equipment Plan  
i. 
Indicate specialty equipment, owner-supplied equipment, and specialty 
storage systems.  
ii. 
Schedules 
h) Power and Voice/Data Plan 
i. 
Power and data concept plans to show outlet box locations, furniture & 
medical equipment power feed locations, and data termination box 
locations.   
i) 
Interior Elevations 
i. 
Elevations of casework and areas with special design features or 
material treatments.  
ii. 
Indicate location of medical and office equipment.  
iii. 
Indicate ceiling heights and soffits.  


--- PAGE 27 ---
iv. 
Indicate location of electrical outlets, switches, controls, and other 
devices. 
j) Exterior Elevations  
k) Door and Frame Types and Window Types  
i. 
Door and Specialty doors (i.e., folding partitions, fire shutters, rolling 
grilles, etc.) types 
ii. 
Door frame types 
iii. 
Window types  
l) 
Partition types  
i. 
Detailed types indicating construction, height, fire rating with associated 
U.L. assembly reference, acoustical ratings, and any special 
construction. 
m) Sections and Details 
i. 
Concept sections and details as required for a representation of 
elements to capture architectural and branding elements   to be 
constructed, including but not limited to walls, door, millwork, and 
other special or custom design elements, and any other details as may 
be required for construction. 
n) Mechanical 
i. 
Describe building load and design concept. 
ii. 
Describe zoning concept and indicate CFM. 
iii. 
Special equipment requirements, descriptions, and locations. 
iv. 
Special exhaust provisions. 
v. 
Equipment schedule indicating capacity of roof top units, fans, pumps, 
compressors, boilers, chillers, etc. 
vi. 
Single-line schematic layout showing locations of equipment, major 
piping, or zone of heating and ventilating system. 
o) Electrical 
i. 
Describe service size and distribution.  
ii. 
Describe building load and design concept. 
iii. 
Describe generator or back up power systems and design concept. 
iv. 
Indicate switch gear, transformers, and electrical panels sizes. 
v. 
Special equipment requirements, descriptions, and locations. 
vi. 
Equipment schedule indicating size of switch gear, transformers, 
generators, electrical panels and lighting fixtures, etc. 
vii. 
Single-line riser diagram schematic layout showing service size, switch 
gear, transformers, generator, electrical panels, and wire sizes.   
p) Plumbing 
i. 
Describe design concept, fixture calculation, and systems. 
ii. 
Special equipment requirements, descriptions, and locations. 
iii. 
Equipment schedule indicating type of fixtures.   
iv. 
Single-line schematic layout showing stacks and risers, hot/cold water 
piping, sanitary piping, and provisions for specialty equipment.  
q) Low Voltage and IT 
i. 
Indicate voice/data outlet locations. 
ii. 
Indicate TV outlet locations. 
iii. 
Indicate video surveillance camera locations. 
iv. 
Indicate access control card reader locations. 
v. 
Indicate Nurse Call system.  
3. Furniture and medical equipment installation plans are not included in this task and will 
be provided by Owner’s Alliance Partners responsible for such services; however, the 
proposed placement of furniture and medical equipment from the Alliance Partner shall 


--- PAGE 28 ---
be shown on the plan by the Architect and confirmed by the Owner or Designated 
Representative. 
4. The Architect shall submit an MEP Narrative and Design Development Document set 
(consistent with the examples provided) to the Owner and advise the Owner of any 
adjustments to the estimate of the Cost of the Work and request the Owner’s approval.  
B. The Architect acknowledges and agrees that the process of preparing Design Development 
Documents that are ultimately approved by the Owner may involve multiple revisions and drafts 
in the normal evolution of the design, cost estimating, and value engineering processes based 
upon the Schematic Design Documents previously approved in writing by the Owner, all of 
which shall be included in the Architect's services hereunder and have been contemplated by 
the Architect in the design Schedule and the Total Fee.  For example, the Design Development 
Documents may be tentatively finished, used as the basis for cost estimating and then revised 
for value engineering purposes as part of the Architect's services for the Total Fee hereunder. 
C. Milestone Review Meetings during this phase include but are not limited to: 
1. Review in progress Architectural, Furniture / Medical Equipment and along with 
millwork elevations with Design Experience and Owner’s Business, Owner or Designated 
Representative. 
2. Discuss Power/Data requirements and revisions made to drawings and discuss any 
additional additions or changes to the plans with Design Experience and Owner’s 
Business, Owner or Designated Representative. 
3. Finalize Power/Data requirements, finalize and review finish plan and all other changes 
for final approval prior to moving into the Construction Document phase with Design 
Experience and Owner’s Business, Owner or Designated Representative. 
D. At completion of Design Development, the Architect will upload the package onto the Owner’s 
Cloud- Based Documentary Repository website for use by all project stakeholders. Included in 
the drawings, if applicable, will be an indication the documents contain exceptions to the 
standards for which approval is pending. 
E. The Architect shall not prepare drawings or any other documents beyond the Design 
Development Phase containing exceptions to the applicable Program Guidelines that have not 
been approved by the Owner or its Designated Representative. If the Design Development 
Phase has been completed and the exceptions have not been approved, the Architect shall 
notify the Owner or its Designated Representative in writing of such if the exceptions have not 
been approved, and that preparation of Construction Documents will not commence unless or 
until approval or denial of the exception request is obtained. 
F. If the Owner delivers a written notice to the Architect stating that the Owner has approved the 
Design Development Documents, then the Architect shall proceed to prepare the Construction 
Documents as required by Section 4.2.3.4 of this Agreement. 
 
4.2.3.4 Construction Development Phase Services  
A. The preparation of Construction Documents will not commence for any project containing 
Exceptions Requests that have not been approved by Design Experience. 
B. The Architect will participate in project calls as needed facilitated by the Owner’s Designated 
Representative at the start of CD phase through Close-Out. 
C. Based on the Owner’s approval of the Design Development Documents, and on the Owner’s 
authorization of any adjustments in the Project requirements and the budget for the Cost of the 
Work, the Architect shall prepare Construction Documents for the Owner’s Designated 
Representative’s approval. The Construction Documents shall illustrate and describe the further 
development of the approved Design Development Documents and shall consist of Drawings 
and Specifications setting forth in detail the quality levels and performance criteria of materials 
and systems and other requirements for the construction of the Work. The Owner and Architect 
acknowledge that, to perform the Work, the Contractor will provide additional information, 


--- PAGE 29 ---
including Shop Drawings, Product Data, Samples and other similar submittals, which the 
Architect shall review in accordance with Section 4.2.3.6H. 
D. Construction Documents.  The Architect acknowledges and agrees that the process of preparing 
Construction Documents that are ultimately approved by the Owner or their Designated 
Representative may involve limited revisions   based upon the previously approved Design 
Development Documents, all of which shall be included in the Architect's services hereunder 
and have been contemplated by the Architect in the Design Master Schedule and the Total Fee.  
The Architect shall notify the Owner or their Designated Representative in writing of any 
requirement for the Contractor to provide professional design services or certifications by a 
design professional, except for manufactured and fabricated items and other items and systems 
to the extent that it is the normal custom and practice for such items to be engineered by 
contractors, subcontractors, or suppliers, proposed by the Architect in any draft of the proposed 
Construction Documents and any such requirements shall be subject to the written approval of 
the owner, which approval may be withheld in its sole and absolute discretion.  Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained herein, the Construction Documents shall require Shop 
Drawings, samples, mock-ups or other necessary information to be submitted by the Contractor 
for all systems contracted herein, and other components as reasonably determined by the 
Architect),  In the event that the Construction Documents require, or the Architect otherwise 
requires, additional Shop Drawing submittals by the Contractor whereby design services 
customarily rendered by the Architect have, for practical purposes, become design/build by the 
Contractor, the Total Fee shall be reasonably adjusted and reduced accordingly. 
E. The Architect and the Owner agree that some systems, materials, or equipment can be more 
effectively and economically designed by the responsible installers, subcontractors or 
fabricators who will be contracted to the Contractor or to the Owner directly as delegated 
design. The Architect shall designate those parts of the Work that shall be delegated design for 
which submittals such as Shop Drawings, Product Data, and Samples, shall be required of the 
Contractor. The Architect shall review the Contractor’s submittal schedule and shall not 
unreasonably delay or withhold approval of the schedule. The Architect’s action in reviewing 
submittals shall be taken in accordance with the approved submittal schedule or, in the absence 
of an approved submittal schedule, with reasonable promptness while allowing sufficient time, 
in the Architect’s professional judgment, to permit adequate review. All delegated design 
services shall be provided by design professionals licensed in the jurisdiction where the Project 
is located, and the delegated design plans and specifications shall include the certifications of 
such licensed design professionals as required by law. The Contractor’s delegated design 
professionals shall be required to coordinate their submittals with the Architect’s Instruments of 
Service and to advise the Architect of any potential conflicts. 
F. The Architect shall incorporate the design requirements for permit application in accordance 
with the governing authorities having jurisdiction over the Project into the Construction 
Documents. The documents will also conform to the most current Owner Design Guidelines. 
These guidelines may include (but will not necessarily be limited to) security guidelines, design 
guidelines for telecommunication equipment rooms, furniture, medical equipment, interior 
finishes, and other clinical and administrative design guidelines. 
G. During the development of the Construction Documents, the Architect shall assist the Owner as 
requested in the development and preparation of (1) procurement information that describes 
the time, place, and conditions of bidding, including bidding or proposal forms; (2) the form of 
agreement between the Owner and Contractor; and (3) the Conditions of the Contract for 
Construction (General, Supplementary and other Conditions).  
H. During the development of the Construction Documents, the Architect shall prepare the below 
and transmit the completed Contract Documents to Designated Representative and to other 
parties as directed by the Owner or Designated Representative: 
1. For Ground Up projects only: The preparation of a 50% Construction Document 
review set. The Architect will participate in a review meeting with the Designated 


--- PAGE 30 ---
Representatives to review progress: Architectural, Structural, and MEP design to 
confirm compliance with the project scope of work. (Civil, landscape or other 
consultants shall be included as needed). 
2. A 90% Construction Document review set meeting shall be set up by the Architect as 
needed depending on level of scope and direction by the Owner and/or Owner’s 
Designated Representative The Architect will participate in the review meeting with 
the Owner or their Designated Representative, Design Experience, The Project 
Manager, Facilities, and General Contractor  to review  progress of Architectural, 
Structural, and MEP Design to confirm compliance with the project scope of work 
and discuss any additional comments. Other consultants and engineers may be 
invited by the Project Manager to the meeting depending on the scope of work. Any 
comments from the 50% Construction Document shall already be incorporated into 
this review. The Construction Documents shall be coordinated between disciplines 
and consultants.  
I. 
Construction drawings and specifications, or other construction documents or construction 
contract documents submitted by Architect to the Owner’s Designated Representative for 
approval or to any contractors for bidding or negotiation shall be reasonably complete and 
unambiguous in accordance with generally accepted architectural practice and in compliance 
with applicable codes, ordinances, statutes, regulations, and laws.   
1. The documents shall be prepared to a level of detail adequate to competitively bid 
each project, as required by Owner or Designated Representative.  
2. Certain projects, depending on the scope of work, may require the Architect to 
incorporate drawings and specifications for specialized equipment, layouts, 
accessories, etc. provided by other consultants who are also contracted on the 
project. If the plans are not provided by the Alliance Partner’s or are provided at a 
level of detail found to be inadequate to obtain permits, the Architect shall create 
such detail as directed by Owner or Designated Representative. 
3. The Construction Documents package will consist of all documents required for 
bidding and submission for permit application, including but not limited to: 
a) Specifications  
i. 
Architectural specification requirements per current MasterSpec 
divisions and format 
b) Demolition Plan 
i. 
Clear depiction of existing walls, doors and other building components   to 
remain or to be removed shall be shown within the demolition plan 
ii. 
Any special conditions or general notes applicable to the 
specific project shall be included within the construction 
documents. 
c) Floor Plans 
i. 
Existing and new partition locations 
ii. 
Existing and new door locations 
iii. 
Millwork locations 
iv. 
Locations of furniture, artwork, medical equipment and FFE plan and 
schedules 
v. 
Wall types 
vi. 
Room Numbers 
vii. 
Specification(s) of any specialty items utilized by Owner 
d) Reflected Ceiling Plan 
i. 
Existing and/or new ceiling grid location 
ii. 
New ceiling elements to be installed 
iii. 
Above Finished Floor (AFF) dimension 
iv. 
Coordination with approved furniture & medical equipment 


--- PAGE 31 ---
layout with proposed lighting layout to eliminate conflict 
v. 
Audio Visual locations 
vi. 
Any applicable ceiling soffit details 
e) Power and Voice/Data Plan 
i. 
Power and data concept plans to show outlet box locations, furniture 
& medical equipment power feed locations / types, and data 
termination box locations. Dimensions will be shown only when 
critical locations are required. All plans shall be coordinated with 
consultants.  
f) Elevations, Sections and Details 
i. 
Elevation, sections and details as required for a true and accurate 
picture of all items to be constructed, including but not limited to 
walls, door, millwork and other special or custom designed items 
and any other details as may be required for construction 
g) Life Safety Plan 
i. 
A Life Safety Plan shall be included that demonstrates compliance 
with life safety, building and egress requirements.  
4. The final (100% complete) set of Contract Documents shall include the 
following where applicable: 
a) Signed and sealed architectural drawings and specifications as described 
above. 
b) Signed and sealed Structural Engineering drawings and specifications as 
may be required by the scope of a specific project. 
c) Signed and sealed mechanical engineering drawings and specifications 
inclusive of HVAC distribution and thermostat locations as may be 
required by the scope of a specific project. 
d) Signed and sealed electrical engineering drawings and specifications 
inclusive of all required distribution for electrical and special outlets, 
including existing conditions as may be required by the scope of a specific 
project. 
e) Signed / sealed plumbing drawings and specifications showing all hot and 
cold-water supply systems, from point for connection to base building 
system, as may be required by the scope of a specific project. 
f) Signed and sealed civil drawings and specifications that illustrate the 
design and details of a construction project’s site, including grading, 
landscaping, utility layouts, and stormwater plans.  
g) Fire protection systems drawings inclusive of overhead sprinkler layout 
may be required by the scope of a specific project. 
h) Consultant drawings as required by code and scope. 
J. The Architect and the Architect’s Consultants shall answer questions and/or clarify design 
concepts from other project Alliance Partners, Consultants, and/or contractors bidding on the 
project  
K. By submitting the same for construction contract purposes, Architect certifies that Architect has 
informed the Owner or Owner’s Designated Representative of any tests, studies, analyses or 
reports which are necessary or advisable to be performed by or for the Owner at that point in 
time, Architect shall additionally confirm these facts in writing at such time, if Owner or their 
Designated Representative so requests. 
L. The Architect shall submit the Construction Documents to the Owner’s Designated 
Representative and advise of any adjustments to the estimate of the Cost of the Work, take any 
action required, and request the Owner’s approval. 
 
 


--- PAGE 32 ---
4.2.3.5 Preconstruction, Bidding and Permitting Phase Services  
The Architect shall perform the services identified in this Section 4.2.3.5 as a Basic Service. Upon 
receipt of the Owner’s or their Designated Representative’s written request, the Architect shall 
assist in reviewing the Contractor’s contract sum proposal. Upon written authorization by the 
Owner, the Architect shall update the Drawings, Specifications, and other documents to incorporate 
the agreed upon assumptions and clarifications contained in the Contractor’s contract sum 
proposal. 
The Architect shall, consider requests for substitutions, seek approval of Design Experience, and 
prepare and distribute addenda identifying approved substitutions, upon the Owner’s written 
authorization, to all prospective bidders. 
A. Permitting 
1. The Architect shall prepare permit submittal documents to comply with the 
requirements set forth by Authorities Having Jurisdiction over the project. The Architect 
shall be jointly responsible along with Owner or Designated Representative for providing 
the information required by those agencies to obtain approval of the necessary Building 
Permit(s) to proceed with the lawful construction of the project described in the 
construction documents. This information shall include written and/or verbal response 
to requests for information, clarification or modifications by Authorities Having 
Jurisdiction over the project. The actual permit submittal process shall be the 
responsibility of the Architect. 
2. The Architect will exercise reasonable diligence to determine the requirements of 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction and review timeline prior to submitting the 
documents to the Authority Having Jurisdiction for review. The Architect will 
coordinate with Owner or Designated Representative the permit requirements set 
forth by Authorities Having Jurisdiction. 
3. The Architect will coordinate with Owner or Designated Representative on the 
permit submittal process. The Architect and Owner or Designated Representative 
shall determine if a Permit Expeditor is required for the permit process. If the Owner 
or Designated Representative approves the use of a Permit Expeditor, the Architect 
has a contract with the Permit Expeditor. The Owner or Designated Representation 
may elect to submit for individual permits including but not limited to; 
zoning/planning, site/grading, demolition, foundation, and building.  
a) The Architect will provide a submittal log updated and submitted weekly 
to the Owner or Designated Representative.  
b) The Architect will actively manage the permit status on all projects keep 
the Owner’s Designated Representative updated and ensure on time 
delivery of the permit. 
4. Permitting will include: 
a) Original Permit submission 
b) Permit review comments as necessary for obtaining the permit. 
5. Attendance at pre-submittal meetings and expedited plan review meetings 
requested by the Owner or Designated Representative will be considered an 
Additional Service. If a face-to-face meeting between the Architect and the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction is required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction this shall not be 
considered an Additional Service unless the Architect and Owner or Designated 
Representative agree that Authority Having Jurisdiction imposes atypical or unusual 
requirements. 
6. Permitting expenses paid by the Architect and charged as a reimbursable expense 
to the project include: 
a) Review Fees 
b) Permit Expeditor 
 


--- PAGE 33 ---
B. Bidding 
1. During the Bidding Phase, the Architect will coordinate with the Owner or 
Designated Representative the preparation of the bid package. The Architect will be 
responsible for providing the Construction Documents. 
2. The Architect will receive and answer questions, as submitted by the Owner or 
Designated Representative and Bidders to clarify design intent of the Construction 
Documents. Answers and clarifications shall be issued by the Architect in the form of 
written Addenda. 
3. Architect will attend Pre-Bid meeting(s) as needed. 
4. The Owner or Designated Representative may elect to send the Firm the General 
Contractor’s Bid package. The Architect will be responsible to review and respond to 
Owner or Designated Representative questions and clarifications. The Owner or 
Designated Representative may elect to have the Firm provide a recommendation 
for award of General Contractor. 
5. Reviewing and coordinating value engineering items with the Owner or 
Designated Representative and lowest bidder. 
6. Any rebidding of the bid package requested by the Owner or Designated 
Representative will not constitute a change in scope.  
 
4.2.3.6 Construction Phase Services  
A. The Owner’s Project Manager shall provide administration of the Contract between the Owner 
and the Contractor. If the Owner and Contractor modify such agreement, those modifications 
shall not affect the Architect’s services under the Agreement unless the Owner and the Architect 
amend the Agreement. 
B. The Architect shall advise and consult with the Owner during the Construction Phase Services. 
The Architect shall have authority to act on behalf of the Owner only to the extent provided in 
the Agreement. The Architect shall not have control over, charge of, or responsibility for the 
construction means, methods, techniques, sequences or procedures, or for safety precautions 
and programs in connection with the Work, nor shall the Architect be responsible for the 
Contractor’s failure to perform the Work in accordance with the requirements of the Contract 
Documents. The Architect shall be responsible for the Architect’s negligent acts or omissions, 
but shall not have control over or charge of, and shall not be responsible for, acts or omissions 
of the Contractor or of any other persons or entities performing portions of the Work. 
C. Subject to 4.2.4 Supplemental and Additional Services, the Architect’s responsibility to provide 
Construction Phase Services commences with the award of the Contract for Construction and 
terminates on the date the Architect issues the final Certificate for Payment. 
1. The Owner utilizes a Cloud-Based Documentary Repository website for project 
management and file management. The Architect will receive access to the Owner’s 
Cloud-Based Documentary Repository website. Shop drawings, submittals, and RFI’s 
will be submitted electronically. The Architect shall access the Cloud-Based 
Documentary Repository website to obtain, review and approve the shop drawings, 
submittals, and RFI’s. The Architect shall upload and maintain current project files on 
the Cloud-Based Documentary Repository website. 
D. Duties, responsibilities, and limitations of authority of the Architect shall not be restricted, 
modified, or extended without written agreement of the Owner and Architect with the consent 
of the Contractor, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. 
E. The Architect shall participate in Owner-Architect-Contractor (OAC) project calls; provide 
interpretations of the Construction Documents; review Shop Drawings, Submittals and Finish 
Samples; respond to RFI's and issue Modifications as required for minor revisions to the 
Contract Documents; review and approve Applications for Payments; and review and approve 
Change Orders if requested by the Owner or Designated Representative. 
1. The response to RFI's or modification to the construction documents shall not 


--- PAGE 34 ---
unreasonably delay or withhold approval of the schedule.  
F. Management Information Systems.  If requested by the Owner, the Architect shall actively 
participate in the implementation of and thereafter utilize for the Project a management 
information system (MIS) designated or approved by the Owner.   
G. Evaluations of the Work  
The Architect shall visit the site at intervals appropriate to the stage of construction, or as 
otherwise required by the applicable Service Order, to become generally familiar with the 
progress and quality of the portion of the Work completed, and to determine, in general, if the 
Work observed is being performed in a manner indicating that the Work, when fully completed, 
will be in accordance with the Contract Documents. However, the Architect shall not be 
required to make exhaustive or continuous on-site inspections to check the quality or quantity 
of the Work.  
Key site visits include but are not limited to: 
• 
At the completion of interior framing and MEP rough-in. 
• 
Conducting a punch list at substantial completion. 
• 
Conducting an 11-month (Post C of O) warranty walk-through with the Owner or 
Designated Representative, Facilities, and General Contractor. 
Based on the site visits, the Architect shall keep the Owner or Designated Representative 
reasonably informed about the progress and quality of the portion of the Work completed and 
promptly report to the Owner or Designated Representative(1) known deviations from the 
Contract Documents, (2) known deviations from the most recent construction schedule 
submitted by the Contractor, and (3) defects and deficiencies observed in the Work. 
1. The Architect the authority to reject Work that does not conform to the Contract 
Documents. Whenever the Architect considers it necessary or advisable, the Architect 
shall have the authority to require inspection or testing of the Work in accordance with 
the provisions of the Contract Documents, whether the Work is fabricated, installed or 
completed. However, neither this authority of the Architect nor a decision made in good 
faith either to exercise or not to exercise such authority shall give rise to a duty or 
responsibility of the Architect to the Contractor, Subcontractors, suppliers, their agents 
or employees, or other persons or entities performing portions of the Work. 
2. The Architect shall interpret and decide matters concerning performance under, and 
requirements of, the Contract Documents on written request of the Owner. The 
Architect’s response to such requests shall be made in writing within any time limits 
agreed upon or otherwise with reasonable promptness. 
H. Submittals: The Architect shall review the Contractor’s submittal schedule and shall not 
unreasonably delay or withhold approval of the schedule.  
1. The Architect shall review and approve, or take other appropriate action upon, the 
Contractor’s submittals such as Shop Drawings, Product Data and Samples, but only for 
the limited purpose of checking for conformance with information given and the design 
concept expressed in the Contract Documents. Review of such submittals is not for the 
purpose of determining the accuracy and completeness of other information such as 
dimensions, quantities, and installation or performance of equipment or systems, which 
are the Contractor’s responsibility. The Architect’s review shall not constitute approval of 
safety precautions or construction means, methods, techniques, sequences or 
procedures. The Architect’s approval of a specific item shall not indicate approval of an 
assembly of which the item is a component. 
2.  If the Contract Documents specifically require the Contractor to provide professional 
design services or certifications by a design professional related to systems, materials, or 
equipment, the Architect shall specify the appropriate performance and design criteria 
that such services must satisfy. The Architect shall review and take appropriate action on 
Shop Drawings and other submittals related to the Work designed or certified by the 
Contractor’s design professional, provided the submittals bear such professional’s seal 


--- PAGE 35 ---
and signature when submitted to the Architect. The Architect’s review shall be for the 
limited purpose of checking for conformance with information given and the design 
concept expressed in the Contract Documents. The Architect shall be entitled to rely 
upon, and shall not be responsible for, the adequacy and accuracy of the services, 
certifications, and approvals performed or provided by such design professionals. 
3.  If any governmental entity requires the Architect, as the Architect of Record or 
otherwise, to certify such Shop Drawings or other submittals, the Architect shall provide 
such certification and shall have the right to provide such certification after they have 
been approved by such design professional(s). 
4. The Architect shall review and respond to requests for information about the Contract 
Documents. The Architect shall set forth, in the Contract Documents, the requirements 
for requests for information. Requests for information shall include, at a minimum, a 
detailed written statement that indicates the specific Drawings or Specifications in need 
of clarification and the nature of the clarification requested. The Architect’s response to 
such requests shall be made in writing within any time limits agreed upon, or otherwise 
with reasonable promptness. If appropriate, the Architect shall prepare and issue 
supplemental Drawings and Specifications in response to the requests for information. 
5.  The Architect shall maintain a record of submittals and copies of submittals supplied by 
the Contractor in accordance with the requirements of the Contract Documents. 
I. 
 Changes in the Work 
1. The Architect may order minor changes in the Work that are consistent with the intent 
of the Contract Documents and do not involve an adjustment in the Contract Sum or an 
extension of the Contract Time. Subject to 4.2.4 Supplemental and Additional Services, 
the Architect shall prepare Change Orders and Construction Change Directives for the 
Owner’s approval and execution in accordance with the Contract Documents. 
2. The Architect shall review properly prepared, timely requests by the Owner or 
Contractor for changes in the Work, including adjustments to the Contract Sum or 
Contract Time.  A properly prepared request for a change in the Work shall be 
accompanied by sufficient supporting data and information to permit the Architect to 
make a reasonable determination without extensive investigation or preparation of 
additional drawings or specifications.  If the Architect determines that requested 
changes in the Work are not materially different from the requirements of the Contract 
Documents, the Architect may issue an order for a minor change in the Work or 
recommend to the Owner that the requested change to denied. 
3. Requests for Change.  The Architect shall promptly notify the Owner or the Contractor in 
writing if it rejects any such request because it is not properly prepared or timely and 
such notice shall specify the basis for such rejection and the changes required to make 
the request conform to the requirements. 
4. If the Architect determines that implementation of the requested changes would result 
in a material change to the Contract that may cause an adjustment in the Contract Time 
or Contract Sum, the Architect shall make a recommendation to the Owner, who may 
authorize further investigation of such change.  Upon such authorization, and based 
upon information furnished by the Contractor, if any, the Architect shall estimate any 
additional costs attributable to a Change in Services of the Architect.  With the Owner's 
approval, the Architect shall incorporate those estimates into a Change Order or other 
appropriate documentation for the Owner's execution or negotiation. 
5. The Owner will provide Change Requests to the Architect for review of scope 
modifications warranting a Change Order.  Architect shall review Change Order requests 
within 5 business days and shall not impact project schedule. 
6. A Change Order or a Construction Change Directive shall result in an adjustment in the 
Architect's compensation only if it constitutes a Change in Service. 
7. The Architect shall maintain records relative to changes in the Work. 


--- PAGE 36 ---
8. The Architect must obtain written approval from the Owner or its Designated 
Representative for any changes to the scope, schedule or budget of the project before 
proceeding with such changes. Proceeding without approval is done at Architect’s own 
risk. Such approval may be transmitted electronically via e-mail. Such approval must 
include the project name, number, and a description of the proposed change to scope, 
schedule or budget. 
J. Certificates for Payment to Contractor 
       1. The Owner retains discretion to waive the requirement for the Architect to review and 
 
certify the amounts due Architect, as well as to forego the examination of monthly 
 
pencil requisitions, if applicable.  
       2. The Architect shall provide an evaluation of the Work as provided in Section 2.6.2, that, 
 
to the best of the Architect’s knowledge, information and belief, the Work has  
 
progressed to the point indicated, the quality of the Work is in accordance with the 
 
Contract Documents, and that the Contractor is entitled to payment in the amount 
 
certified. The foregoing representations are subject to (1) an evaluation of the Work for 
 
conformance with the Contract Documents upon Substantial Completion, (2) results of 
 
subsequent tests and inspections, (3) correction of minor deviations from the Contract 
 
Documents prior to completion, and (4) specific qualifications expressed by the  
 
Architect. 
       3. Architect’s Certification.  If requested, the Architect's Certification represents that the 
Work appears (i) to be in compliance with applicable laws, codes, and ordinances, (ii) 
that no changes have been made to the then current Drawings and Specifications 
approved in writing by the Owner and, to the best of its knowledge, information, and 
belief, no substitutions of materials or equipment have been made  without the prior 
written approval of the  Owner, (iii) that to the best of its knowledge, information, and 
belief all permits, approvals, inspections, and other authorizations of all governmental 
entities required under applicable laws, codes, and ordinances have been obtained, (iv) 
that in its reasonable professional judgment the Cost of the work incurred to date is 
consistent with or below the then current budget for the Cost of the work approved in 
writing by the Owner and that it is reasonable and practicable for the Work to be 
completed within such budget, (v) that in its reasonable professional judgment the 
Work completed to date is consistent with or ahead of the then current Project 
Schedule approved in writing by the Owner and that it is reasonable and practicable for 
the Work to be completed within such schedule and (vi) that the Architect has assisted 
the Owner in reviewing copies of requisitions from major subcontractors and material 
suppliers as requested by the Owner to substantiate the Contractor's right to payment. 
The issuance of a Certificate for Payment shall not be a representation that the Architect 
 
has (1) made exhaustive or continuous on-site inspections to check the quality or 
 
quantity of the Work, (2) reviewed construction means, methods, techniques,  
 
sequences or procedures, (3) reviewed copies of requisitions received from  
 
Subcontractors and suppliers and other data requested by the Owner to substantiate 
 
the Contractor’s right to payment, or (4) ascertained how or for what purpose the 
 
Contractor has used money previously paid on account of the Contract Sum. 
K. Project Completion 
1. The Architect shall 
a) conduct inspections to determine the date or dates of Substantial Completion and 
the date of final completion. 
b) issue Certificates of Substantial Completion. 


--- PAGE 37 ---
c) forward to the Owner, for the Owner’s review and records, written warranties and 
related documents required by the Contract Documents and received from the 
Contractor 
d) if requested, issue a final Certificate for Payment based on a final inspection 
indicating that, to the best of the Architect’s knowledge, information, and belief, the 
Work complies with the requirements of the Contract Documents. 
e) provide to owner data points for completed project.  See the database checklist 
provided during Onboarding Training.  
2. The Architect’s inspections shall be conducted with the Owner or Designated 
Representative to check the conformance of the Work with the requirements of the 
Contract Documents and to verify the accuracy and completeness of the list submitted 
by the Contractor of Work to be completed or corrected. 
a) Throughout the production and installation phases of any project, the Architect 
shall work to proactively identify and resolve any deficiency list items prior to the 
completion of the final installation to effectively prevent them from being 
identified as formal deficiency (Punch) list items.  
b) The Architect shall perform inspections and/or prepare a punch list for each portion 
of the work appropriately completed and ready for occupancy or use by the Owner 
which identifies all items which the Architect observes in the performance of its 
duties to evaluate the Work and inspect the Work to be incomplete, not in 
accordance with the Contract Documents, expectations of the Owner or not in 
compliance with applicable laws, codes, or ordinances. 
c) Deficiency Resolution:   The Owner’s Project Manager shall track all discrepancies, 
product quality complaints, service delivery issues or warranty claims 
electronically.  All tools employed by the Project Manager for deficiency correction 
tracking shall be visible to the Owner and Architect.     
d) The Project Manager shall produce a deficiency list with the Architect and review 
the installation to identify the appropriate actions to resolve the identified 
deficiencies.   
e) The Project Manager shall create a deficiency report, using the deficiency list, to 
track each deficiency through resolution, and share such report with the project 
team.  The report shall contain information including but not limited to:  
i. 
An itemized list of each deficiency and date identified  
ii. 
The actions and documentation taken by the Architect to correct the 
deficiency   
iii. 
The date of resolution of the deficiency   
iv. 
The resolution owner.  
v. 
Sign off by the Architect and Owner to certify the resolution of each 
deficiency   
3. When Substantial Completion has been achieved, the Architect shall inform the Owner 
about the balance of the Contract Sum remaining to be paid by the Contractor, including 
the amount to be retained from the Contract Sum, if any, for final completion or 
correction of the Work. 
4. Within thirty (30) days of occupancy, or as required by the AHJ for Certificate of 
Occupancy, if earlier, the Architect will prepare and upload As Constructed Record ReVit 
and CAD files and Documents to include changes issued by the Architect and 
information provided by the construction contractors.   
a) The Architect will electronically submit the As Constructed Record Documents and 
Master Building Information Models for post construction use to the Owner for use 
at the Owner's discretion. The end work product will be owned by the Owner. The 
Architect will upload and log those documents/files into the Owner’s Document 
repository.  


--- PAGE 38 ---
b) Emergency Evacuation Plans: The Architect shall prepare and submit to the Owner 
an Emergency Evacuation Plan showing the layout of the floor plan, exit sign 
locations, and fire extinguisher locations. The document will include the following 
information: Title Block listing the Firm, certificate of occupancy date, and drawing 
date. The document shall conform to the most current design guidelines  
c) Providing (unflattened) building guide pdf plans according to Owner’s template 
and requirements  
d) Any Samples of materials for the project are expected to be reviewed with Design 
Experience for records and delivered as directed by Design Experience. 
 
4.2.3.7 Facility Operation Services  
A. The Architect shall meet with the Owner or the Owner's Designated Representative promptly 
after Substantial Completion to review the need for facility operation services. 
B. Start-Up.  The Architect shall assist in equipment start-up activities as reasonably requested by 
the Owner but excluding the training of operations personnel and any commissioning after the 
conclusion of equipment start-up activities. 
C. Upon request of the Owner, and prior to the expiration of one year from the date of Substantial 
Completion, the Architect shall, without the Architect’s additional compensation, conduct a 
meeting with the Owner to review the facility operations and performance and to make 
appropriate recommendations to the Owner.  
D. Warranty Claims.  The Architect shall notify the Owner in writing of any items observed by the 
Architect that (i) require claims to be made under any one-year warranties or that are 
incomplete, (ii) are not in accordance with the Contract Documents of (iii) are not in compliance 
with applicable laws, codes, or ordinances, and such written notice shall be given to the Owner 
at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of such one-year warranty. 
 
4.2.4 Supplemental and Additional Services 
The services listed in the AIA 221-2018 Service Order under Article 2.1.2 are not included in Basic 
Services but may be required for the Project. The Architect shall provide the listed Supplemental 
Services only if specifically designated in the table under Article 2.1.2 as the Architect’s responsibility, 
and the Owner shall compensate the Architect as provided in Article 4 and according to Exhibits E and F. 
Unless otherwise specifically addressed in the Agreement, if neither the Owner nor the Architect is 
designated, the parties agree that the listed Supplemental Service is not being provided for the Project. 
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, as a condition precedent to any 
additional compensation to be paid to the Architect for a Change in Services hereunder, the 
Owner and the Architect shall memorialize the terms of any Change in Services, including a 
description of the services to be performed and the adjustment to the Architect's compensation 
and the Design Schedule and/or the Project Schedule, in writing and executed by both of them 
prior to the Architect performing any Change in Services at any time by giving written notice 
thereof to the Architect, in which event the Architect shall promptly notify the Owner of its 
reasonable estimate of the impact of such Change in Service on the Design Schedule and the 
Architect's compensation. 
 
4.2.5 Cost of the Work 
A. For purposes of the Agreement, the Cost of the Work shall be the total cost to the Owner to 
construct all elements of the Project designed or specified by the Architect and shall include 
contractors’ general conditions costs, overhead and profit. The Cost of the Work also includes 
the reasonable value of labor, materials, and equipment, donated to, or otherwise furnished by, 
the Owner. The Cost of the Work does not include the compensation of the Architect; the costs 
of the land, rights-of-way, financing, or contingencies for changes in the Work; or other costs 
that are the responsibility of the Owner. 


--- PAGE 39 ---
B. The Owner’s budget for the Cost of the Work is provided in Initial Information and shall be 
adjusted throughout the Project as required herein. Evaluations of the Owner’s budget for the 
Cost of the Work, and the preliminary estimate of the Cost of the Work and updated estimates 
of the Cost of the Work, shall be prepared by the Owner’s Project Manager.  
C. The Architect will work with the Owner’s Project Manager to meet the Owner’s budget for the 
Project. Contingencies may be permitted to be included for design, bidding, and price 
escalation; to determine what materials, equipment, component systems, and types of 
construction are to be included in the Contract Documents; to recommend reasonable 
adjustments in the program and scope of the Project; and to include design alternates as may be 
necessary to adjust the estimated Cost of the Work to meet the Owner’s budget. 
D. If at any time the estimate of the Cost of the Work exceeds the Owner’s budget for the Cost of 
the Work, the Architect shall make appropriate recommendations, in coordination with the 
Owner’s Project Manager to the Owner to adjust the Project’s design. 
E. The Owner, Architect and the Architect's Consultant(s) acknowledge that changes may be 
required during the construction process for a variety of reasons not arising out of changes in 
project scope, including but not limited to changes due to undetected, unexpected or concealed 
conditions, changes recommended or requested by the construction contractors, changes 
requested by the Owner, and possible omissions, ambiguities or inconsistencies in the plans and 
specifications prepared by the design professional(s) and, therefore, that the costs of the project 
may exceed the original construction contract sum.  If after construction has begun, an error or 
omission is discovered and the item can still be provided in the sequence of construction 
without premium to the Owner, then the Owner will "pay" for this item just as if it had been 
included in the Bid Documents.  If this error or omission is discovered out of sequences with the 
construction schedule, then the Architect will reimburse the Owner for the premium to have 
this item corrected or included while the Owner will "pay" for the item as if it had been included 
in the original documents.  Compensation for the reimbursement costs described above will not 
be made by the Architect or the Architect's consultant(s) directly to the construction 
contractors.  The Owner will make all payments to the Contractor(s).  Compensation by the 
design consultant will be made directly to the Owner and will first be executed by an 
Amendment to the Service Order that reduces the Compensation to the Design Consultant by 
the appropriate amount.  If sufficient fees do not remain to cover the expenses, the Design 
Consultant will reimburse the Owner directly from fees previously paid.  The Design Professional 
agrees to develop solutions and documents and to assist the Owner in negotiating the cost of 
the change due to errors, omission and ambiguities with the construction contractor at no 
additional cost to the Owner in fees from the Design Consultant. 
 
4.2.6 Special Provisions 
A. Sustainability 
1. The Architect will support the Owner’s goal of incorporating sustainable measures 
into the design, construction, maintenance, and operations to achieve a benefit to 
the environment, to enhance the health and wellbeing of building occupants and to 
manage energy, waste, and water use when possible. 
2. The Owner may, from time to time, seek certain sustainability certifications 
including, but not limited to, LEED, WELL Building, Energy Star and other industry 
certifications related to sustainability (the “Sustainability Certification”). The Owner 
or its Designated Representative will notify the Architect of the Sustainability 
Certification being sought and the specific credits involving the Architect. The 
Architect will fully cooperate with the Owner or its Designated Representative to 
provide the necessary documentation for registration and certification. Fees related 
to the Sustainability Certification will be charged in accordance with Exhibits E and F 
attached hereto. 
B. Inclusion and Diversity 


--- PAGE 40 ---
1. The Architect and the Owner will promote workplace inclusion and diversity 
through diverse leadership advancement, reducing the impact of unconscious bias 
and improving equitable access. 
2. Through its Tier 2 supplier diversity program, the Owner extends its diversity 
efforts to the Architect and expects the Architect to incorporate supplier diversity 
into their own sourcing practices when possible. 
C. Disengagement Assistance 
With respect to any software used to provide Design Services, if the Owner is entitled 
pursuant to this Agreement to a sublicense or other right to use any software owned or 
licensed by the Architect, the Architect shall provide such sublicense or other right.  
The Owner may request Disengagement Assistance beginning (i) one (1) year prior to 
expiration of this Agreement; (ii) upon a notice of non-renewal or termination (including 
notice based upon default by the Owner) of this Agreement or of one or more Design 
Services; or (iii) at any time during the Term in connection with the cessation or 
withdrawal of any of the Design Services from the scope of this Agreement (an “Exit 
Event”) and continuing for six (6) months following the effective date of the Exit Event 
(as such effective date may be extended under this Agreement). The Architect will be 
compensated for Disengagement Assistance activities according to Exhibits E and F 
attached hereto. 
Disengagement Assistance shall include the following activities: 
1. Process and Impact: The Architect will perform the Disengagement Assistance in a 
manner that facilitates the efficient and orderly transfer of the Disengaged Services to 
the Owner or its successor service provider (“Successor Provider”), minimizes the 
impact on the Owner’s business, and incorporates a knowledge transfer process that 
transfers operational information about the Services from the Architect to the Owner or 
the Successor Provider in reusable form and a format determined by the Owner 
2. Multiple Successor Service Providers: If there is more than one successor service 
provider, the Architect will perform the Disengagement Assistance with respect to each 
Successor Provider 
3. Orderly Transfer of Services: The activities, information, and other assistance that the 
Owner requests from the Architect to enable an orderly transfer of Services from the 
Architect to the Owner or its Designated Representative without interruption or adverse 
effect to the Owner 
4. Software Transfer: With respect to any software used to provide Design Services, if the 
Owner is entitled pursuant to this Agreement to a sublicense or other right to use any 
software owned or licensed by the Architect, the Architect shall provide such sublicense 
or other right. 
 
4.3 One off, Infrastructure, MDF, and Refresh Projects  
A. One-off Projects may include but will not be limited to project types not defined in Exhibit 
C Definitions, infrastructure or others as approved by Design Experience.  
1. If there are any services required that do not directly correlate to established fee 
matrices, the Owner reserves the right to negotiate the fees for that specific 
project or service. 
2. A Service Order will be prepared by the Architect for all One-off Projects. 
Consulting engineering or other required consulting services for these projects 
may also be part of the Service Order. If required, Consulting Engineering services 
shall be bid per the Owner or Designated Representative’s direction and billed 
separately. 
B. Infrastructure and MDF Projects: The Owner or its Designated Representative may from time-
to-time request the Architect to provide Design Services for projects related to the facility 
operations, mechanical systems and building infrastructure (“Infrastructure Projects”) of its 


--- PAGE 41 ---
sites.  
1. A Service Order will be prepared by the Architect for all Infrastructure Projects. 
Consulting engineering or other required consulting services for these projects 
may also be part of the Service Order. If required, Consulting Engineering services 
shall be bid per the Owner or Designated Representative’s direction and billed 
separately. 
2. Hourly Rate Structure in Exhibit E will be used to establish a Not to exceed based 
on hourly rates provided. 
3. Project kick-off: Review with Owner’s the project scope of work, budget, and schedule.  
Consultation with Owner and Designated Representative to align on design document 
deliverable, schedule, and budget prior to the start of work.   
4. The Architect shall incorporate the design requirements in accordance with the 
governing authorities having jurisdiction over the Project into the Construction 
Documents. The design documents will also conform to the most current Owner 
Design Guidelines. These guidelines may include (but will not necessarily be limited 
to) security guidelines, design guidelines for telecommunication equipment rooms, 
furniture, medical equipment, interior finishes, and other clinical and 
administrative design guidelines. 
5. The documents shall be prepared to a level of detail adequate to competitively bid 
each project, as required by Owner or Designated Representative. 
6. Certain projects, depending on the scope of work, may require the Architect to 
incorporate drawings and specifications for specialized equipment, layouts, 
accessories, etc. Shared by other consultants who are also contracted on the 
project. If the plans are not provided by the Alliance Partner’s or are provided at a 
level of detail found to be inadequate to obtain permits, the Architect shall create 
such detail as directed by Owner or Designated Representative. 
7. Upon completion of the Construction Documents the architect shall set up a 
review meeting with the Owner or Designated Representative to confirm 
compliance with the project scope of work, budget, and schedule.   
8. The Architect and the Architect’s Consultants shall answer questions and/or clarify 
design concepts from other project Alliance Partners, Consultants, and/or 
contractors bidding on the project 
9. The Architect shall provide Construction Phase Services as required by the Owner 
or Designated Representative.  Construction Phase Services the Architect shall 
work with the Owner or Designated Representative to determine the Construction 
Phase Services based on the project scope of work. 
C. Refresh or Finish Plan Projects: The Owner or its Designated Representative may from time-to-
time request the Architect to provide Design Services for projects related to application of a 
finish palette or finish upgrades of its sites.  
1. A Service Order will be prepared by the Architect for all Infrastructure Projects. 
Consulting engineering or other required consulting services for these projects 
may also be part of the Service Order. If required, Consulting Engineering services 
shall be bid per the Owner or Designated Representative’s direction and billed 
separately. 
2. Hourly Rate Structure in Exhibit E will be used to establish a Not to exceed based 
on hourly rates provided. 
3. Project kick-off: Review with Owner’s the project scope of work, budget, and schedule.  
Consultation with Owner and Designated Representative to align on design document 
deliverable, schedule, and budget prior to the start of work.   
4. The Architect shall incorporate the design requirements in accordance with the 
governing authorities having jurisdiction over the Project into the Construction 


--- PAGE 42 ---
Documents. The design documents will also conform to the most current Owner 
Design Guidelines. These guidelines may include (but will not necessarily be limited 
to) furniture, medical equipment, interior finishes, and other clinical and 
administrative design guidelines. 
5. The documents shall be prepared to a level of detail adequate to competitively bid 
each project, as required by Owner or Designated Representative.  The Design 
Documents will consist of all design documents required but not limited to: 
a) Furniture Plan 
• Fixtures and furniture indicated to scale.  
• Schedules 
b) Finish Plan 
• Indicate floor finish, wall finish, ceiling finish, and wall protection. 
• Indicate window treatments. 
• Schedules 
6. Upon completion of the Construction Documents the architect shall set up a 
review meeting with the Owner or Designated Representative to confirm 
compliance with the project scope of work, budget, and schedule.   
7. The Architect and the Architect’s Consultants shall answer questions and/or clarify 
design concepts from other project Alliance Partners, Consultants, and/or 
contractors bidding on the project 
8. The Architect shall provide Construction Phase Services as required by the Owner 
or Designated Representative.  Construction Phase Services the Architect shall 
work with the Owner or Designated Representative to determine the Construction 
Phase Services based on the project scope of work.  
4.4 Architectural and Preliminary Site Plan 
A. A Service Order will be prepared by the Architect for all Projects. Consulting engineering 
or other required consulting services for these projects may also be part of the Service 
Order in accordance with Exhibit E and F.  
B. Ensure design and project design documents are created with a practical eye and common 
sense leveraging prudent use of capital while maintaining quality, alignment to project scope of 
work, Owner expectations, and guidelines. 
C. The design documents shall be prepared to a level of detail adequate to obtain a high level of 
scope for each project, as required by the Owner or Designated Representative.   
D. Owner or Designated Representative shall provide Firm a copy of the site survey in CAD/Revit 
to develop the Architectural Site Plan and Preliminary Site Plan.  If a PDF copy of the site survey 
is provided to Firm, the Firm shall determine if the PDF site plan is acceptable to utilize in the 
creation of the Architectural Site Plan.  If the PDF copy of the site plan is deemed to be 
unacceptable the Owner or Designated Representative shall determine the means to obtain a 
CAD/Revit site survey.   
E. The Architectural Site Plan will consist of but not limited to: 
1. Limited Planning and Zoning Research.  Planning and Zoning research to be conducted 
on required building setbacks and parking ordinances.   
2. The Architectural Site Plan shall depict the following. 
a) Property Lines 
b) Building Setbacks 
c) Building Footprint that aligns with Program square footage 
d) Schematic Parking Lot Layout, including number of parking spaces identified 


--- PAGE 43 ---
3. Identify assumptions made and future concerns that shall be investigated during the 
Preliminary Site Plan phase 
a) Project kick-off: Review with Owner’s the project site and project scope of 
work.  Consultation with Owner and Designated Representative to align on 
design document deliverable, schedule, and budget prior to the start of work.   
b) Upon completion of the Architectural Site Plan the architect shall set up a 
review meeting with the Owner or Designated Representative to review the 
Architectural Site Plan and review assumptions made and future concerns.   
F. The Preliminary Site Plan will consist of but not limited to: 
1. The Preliminary Site Plan phase will further develop the Architectural Site Plan and 
address the identified assumptions and future concerns noted.  The Preliminary Site 
Plan shall further refine site access, site flow, site topography, and building visibility. 
2. Planning and Zoning Research to develop a site plan that will meet the requirements of 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
3. The Preliminary Site Plan shall depict the following. 
a) Property Lines 
b) Building Setbacks 
c) Landscape Buffers 
d) Building footprint 
e) Detailed Parking Lot Layout 
f) Property Easements 
g) Wetland Areas  
h) Topography 
4. Project kick-off: Review with Owner’s the project site and project scope of work.  
Consultation with Owner and Designated Representative to align on design document 
deliverable, schedule, and budget prior to the start of work.   
5. Upon completion of the Preliminary Site Plan the architect shall set up a review meeting 
with the Owner or Designated Representative to Review Preliminary Site Plan and 
confirm compliance with the project scope of work, and review Planning and Zoning 
requirements.    
G. Architect may be asked to incorporate revisions to the Architectural Site Plan and Preliminary 
Site Plan.  Revisions to an Architectural Site Plan and Preliminary Site Plan that require 
modification of more than 25% of the total site acreage will be considered an Additional 
Service.  Additional Architectural Site Plan and Preliminary Site Plan options will be completed 
as an Additional Service.  
H. Where applicable, the Architect will coordinate and review design documents with civil 
engineer under separate contract commissioned by the Architect. 
 
4.5 Rx Projects: See additional requirements specific to Rx project, if awarded, deliverable 
expectations in Exhibit G 
 
4.6 Innovation and Strategic Design Architectural Partner: See additional requirements specific to 
Innovation Partner, if awarded, expectations in Exhibit H 
 
 


--- PAGE 44 ---
 
5.0 KEY PERSONNEL: 
A. Management & Oversight:  
The Architect will provide consistent service and pricing. The Architect will assign a 
dedicated team(s) to work with the Owner consisting of Key Personnel.    Key Personnel, 
and their assigned leaders will serve as a primary point of accountability/escalation and 
oversight with respect to the design delivery, and the complete suite of projects to be 
delivered pursuant to this Agreement. The individuals identified as Key Architect Personnel 
in the Architect’s submitted RFP proposal response, may not be replaced without the 
Owner’s prior written consent, said consent which shall not be unreasonably withheld. If 
any one of the individuals named in this section becomes unavailable to perform Services in 
connection with the Agreement due to health, elected departure from employment with 
the Architect, or discharge by the Architect for cause, then the Architect, subject to the 
prior written reasonable approval of the Owner, shall promptly appoint a replacement.  The 
Owner shall be entitled to complete information on such proposed replacement, including 
a current resume.  The Owner shall have the right, acting in the Owner’s sole discretion, to 
require that the Architect replace any of the noted personnel, as applicable, for a 
commercially reasonable justification at the Architect sole cost and expense.      
B. Engagement:   
1. Client relationship management and reporting based on one-on-one meetings with 
Design Experience, monthly meetings, and periodic business reviews. 
2. Ensure Owner’s Design Experience lead is informed and up to date regarding 
project/program risks, issues, and upcoming deliverables. 
3. Schedule and facilitate periodic business reviews on cadence specified by the Owner or its 
Designated Representative  
4. Including the firm’s leadership team, schedule and participate in Quarterly Business 
Reviews.   Subject to business needs, the Owner may request additional meeting(s) as 
and when required. 
 
6.0 WORK PRODUCT/DELIVERABLES:  
The performance and measurement of all services under this SOW will be measured and reported in 
accordance with the Service Level Agreements (SLA) established under the Agreement.  
1. Cloud-Based Documentary Repository 
1. The Owner utilizes a Cloud-Based Documentary Repository website for project 
management and file management. The Project team members will be provided 
access to the Owner’s Cloud-Based Documentary Repository website. The Cloud-
Based Documentary Repository website will be accessed by the Architect(s) of 
Record, the Owner and its Designated Representative, Alliance Partners or any other 
parties as requested by the Owner or its Designated Representative. 
2. The Owner’s team shall be responsible for issuing access to the Cloud-Based 
Documentary Repository website to parties identified by the Owner or Designated 
Representative. Cloud- Based Documentary Repository website access and 
permissions will be approved by the Owner or its Designated Representative. 
3. The Owner’s team shall be responsible for the creation of Project folders for the 
Owner’s projects utilizing the Owner’s project template. 
4. The Owner’s team shall be responsible for the management and maintaining of files 
on the Cloud- Based Documentary Repository website. 
5. The uploaded and maintained files shall consist of Program Summary, MBBI Report, 
Preliminary Floor Plans, Design Development drawings, Construction Documents, 
Construction Administration items (Shop drawings, submittals, RFI’s, ASI’s, Project 
Photos), CAD files (.dwg and .rvt) including polylining according to Owner’s defined 
BOMA guidelines (measurement standard is currently ANSI/BOMA Z65.1-2017), and 


--- PAGE 45 ---
As- builts/Record Drawings. No contracts, proposals, bids, invoices, or other financial 
information will be stored on the site. 
 
 
E. SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENTS (SLA): 
 1.0 SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT DELIVERY TIMEFRAMES  
The Service Level Agreement (SLA) is a range to be used as a guideline for the development of a 
project schedule which will be mutually agreed to by Architect and Owner, or its Designated 
Representative. 
Below is the schedule that the Architect will deliver projects according to.  
The SLA time frames does not include Owner approval intervals between phases, or time required 
to obtain approvals for exception requests.  
 
2.0 SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT FRAMEWORK: Timeframe expectations by Project Type (Business 
Days) 
The range of business days assumes the lesser number of days applies to the lower end of the 
square footage category and the longer time frame applies to the higher end of the square footage 
category 
Phase 
New Location / 
Relocation 
Remodel / 
Expansion 
Refresh / 
Infrastructure 
Project Kick-off 
1 
1 
1 
Scope Review 
1–5 
1 
1 
Scenario Development 
5–10 
5–10 
5 
Utilization Analyses 
2–10 
2–5 
1–2 
Site Due Diligence 
5–10 
5 
5 
Detailed Programming 
5 
5 
5 
Preliminary Floor Plan / 
Schematic Design 
Documents 
5–10 
5–10 
5 
Design Development 
Phase 
15 
10–15 
5–10 
Construction Docs 
15–20 
15–20 
15 
Permitting / Bidding 
15–20 
15 
15 
Some projects may warrant accelerated SLA timelines which will be mutually agreed to by Firm and 
Owner.  
 
Management of the project schedule, including the internal approval process, is the responsibility 
of the Owner’s Project Manager, with Architect having responsibility for design delivery 
components of the overall schedule. The timeframe expectations are intended to be adequate and 
appropriate for Architect to deliver its services to an acceptable level by the owner to move 


--- PAGE 46 ---
forward. Incomplete data, untimely additions, or untimely approvals may result in extensions of 
the project schedule. However, incomplete drawings, missed design intent or functionality will not 
warrant additional time to the Architect.  
 
The Architect will not prepare documents containing exceptions to the Owner design guidelines 
without prior approval from Owner’s Design Experience Team directly; and will not under any 
circumstances, commence preparation of Construction Documents containing expectations that 
have not been approved.  
 
F. KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (“KPIs”):   
  (to be finalized prior to contract execution) 
 
Architect shall be responsible for meeting the following Key Performance Indicators. The Architect 
shall present progress toward KPIs at each 6-month Quarterly Business Review (QBR), specifically in 
Q2 and Q4. 
  
In addition to performance tracking, the Architect shall support the Owner’s strategic goals by 
delivering at least two (2) meaningful, supported by due diligence demonstrating viability, program 
recommendations in the six months prior to each bi-annual QBR. These recommendations may 
include—but are not limited to—initiatives that: 
• 
Yield meaningful cost savings 
• 
Improve program and/process efficiency or transparency 
• 
Simplify UHG’s Design Guidelines 
• 
Enhance quality or experience (team member, patient, or workplace) 
• 
Identify relevant learning units for service lines 
• 
Support broader UHG business objectives 
 
 
G.  REPORTING 
The following reports shall be provided to the Owner at no additional charge, but are not limited to: 
1.0 ONGOING PERFORMANCE MONITORING: addressing pipeline, volume, and key initiatives 
A. Manage and analyze Owner information related to design delivery services, process 
KPI Category 
Goal 
Project Delivery 
Timeliness 
Deliver projects on or ahead of project schedule with % of projects 
delivered on time or early based on UHG MBO. 
Client Satisfaction 
Achieve Net Promoter Score (NPS) satisfaction based on UHG MBO 
Design Quality & 
Innovation 
Maintain high design standards with limited RFIs or rework 
Regulatory 
Compliance 
Submit permits on time with minimal feedback (not more than one 
round of clarifications) on 98% or more of assigned projects. 
Cost Alignment 
Stay within approved construction budgets, with less than 3% variance 
between DD and CD milestones per project 
Change Order 
Frequency 
Minimize frequency of post-approval change orders <2% per project. 


--- PAGE 47 ---
compliance, and performance against established Key Performance Indicators (“KPI’s”). 
B. Responsibilities and tasks include, but are not limited to: 
• 
Create, maintain and issue monthly reports. 
• 
Prepare routine and special reports as required. 
• 
Monitor project tracking system for compliance and data integrity. 
• 
Monitor consistency of Project Authorization forms. 
• 
Point of contact for Owner’s Designated Representative regarding project close-out, 
lien waiver requests, etc. 
• 
Comparative analysis of performance and recommendations of opportunities for 
improvements 
 
 
2.0 PROJECT TRACKING REPORTING: Architect shall provide Project tracking reporting, which shall 
include a summary of all projects by project phase.  The report shall provide both a “dashboard” type 
summary supported by detailed project level information. The report shall include the following:  
• 
The total number of requests and projects handled.  
• 
The percentage of requests that met the expected response times. 
• 
Project name  
• 
Brief description 
• 
Percentage of Existing Conditions/ walls (etc.) reused per project 
• 
Scheduled Project phases 
• 
Project order and installation status  
• 
Quote requested, received dates and approval status  
• 
Potential project risk and proposed mitigation strategies  
• 
Project team leader and contact point  
• 
Number of Staff and their percentage of time spent on Owner’s account 
• 
Deficiency report   
• 
Project was or was not delivered according to the agreed-upon schedule, and budget 
at the final funding milestone  
• Cost Savings and applied strategies for cost savings 
• Schedule reduction (savings) 
• Architectural and MEP coordination issues/ misses 
• Number of Change Orders per project 
• Number of RFIs per project- broken down by type (detailed Owner scope change, 
unforeseen conditions, Errors and Omissions) 
 
3.0 DESIGN FEE REPORTING  
Architect shall provide electronic reporting on Design fees by project to include Architectural and all 
consultant’s fees inclusive of reimbursable costs and any add services quarterly and upon request by 
Owner. 
Fees should be compared to budgeted fees/ proposal so that proposed vs actual costs are available. 
Reporting format should match (or exceed) level of detail in Exhibit L and include any requested 
changes by the Owner. 
 
4.0 BUSINESS REVIEWS 
A. Quarterly Business Review Using a format supplied by the Owner, the Architect shall prepare a 
Quarterly Business Review addressing the performance and activity of the Architect, in such 
detail and with such back-up as Owner shall require for presentation to the Owner’s 
stakeholders.  The report shall include information such as:  
i. 
Detailed report of the cost-saving initiatives implemented and the resulting 
savings during the previous quarter and lookahead to future quarter.  
ii. 
Quarterly Project summary including any project risks  
iii. 
Summary of sustainability initiatives implemented on projects. 


--- PAGE 48 ---
iv. 
Summary of pilot initiatives implemented on projects. 
v. 
Summary of Lessons Learned discovered during last quarter  
vi. 
Project Tracking Reports 
vii. 
Service Level Agreements (“SLAs”) and performance measures related to the 
terms and conditions of the Agreement  
B. An annual report which shall include a description of the goals and plans for the coming year 
(and a review of the performance of such goals and plans for the previous year), a report on 
Owner satisfaction surveys, an executive summary of the reports and proposed operating 
budgets if applicable. 
C. Any other ad-hoc, periodic or regular reports as reasonably required by Owner or its Designated 
Representatives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 49 ---
DRAFT
 
     EXHIBIT B 
    EXAMPLE ONLY 
 AIA
® Document B221
™ – 2018  
Service Order for use with Master Agreement Between 
Owner and Architect 
 
SERVICE ORDER number «  » made as of the «  » day of «  » in the year «  » 
(In words, indicate day, month, and year.) 
 
BETWEEN the Owner: 
(Name, legal status, address, and other information) 
 
«  »«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
and the Architect: 
(Name, legal status, address, and other information) 
 
«  »«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
«  »  
 
for the following PROJECT: 
(Name, location, and detailed description) 
 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
THE SERVICE AGREEMENT 
This Service Order, together with the Master Agreement between Owner and Architect dated the «  » day of «  » in 
the year «  » 
(In words, indicate day, month, and year.) 
 
form a Service Agreement. 
 
The Owner and Architect agree as follows. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 50 ---
TABLE OF ARTICLES 
 
1 
INITIAL INFORMATION 
 
2 
SERVICES UNDER THIS SERVICE ORDER 
 
3 
DATE OF COMMENCEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION 
 
4 
COMPENSATION 
 
5 
INSURANCE 
 
6 
PARTY REPRESENTATIVES 
 
7 
ATTACHMENTS AND EXHIBITS 
 
ARTICLE 1   INITIAL INFORMATION 
§ 1.1  Unless otherwise provided in an exhibit to this Service Order, this Service Order and the Service Agreement 
are based on the Initial Information provided in the Project Scope Document: 
(State below any additional details of the Project’s site and program, Owner’s contractors and consultants, 
Architect’s consultants, Owner’s budget and schedule, anticipated procurement method, Owner’s Sustainable 
Objective, and other information relevant to the Project.) 
 
«  » 
 
§ 1.2  The Owner and Architect may rely on the Initial Information. Both parties, however, recognize that if such 
information significantly changes, the Owner and the Architect shall appropriately adjust the schedule, the 
Architect’s services, and the Architect’s compensation. The Owner shall adjust the Owner’s budget for the Cost of 
the Work and the Owner’s anticipated design and construction milestones, as necessary, to accommodate material 
changes in the Initial Information. 
 
§ 1.3 The Owner’s anticipated Sustainable Objective for the Project: 
(Identify and describe the Owner’s Sustainable Objective for the Project, if any.) 
 
«N/A » 
 
§ 1.3.1 If the Owner identifies a project will be certified under a sustainability program, the Owner may decide to 
enter into an agreement with the Architect, and complete and incorporate AIA Document E204™–2017, Sustainable 
Projects Exhibit, into the Agreement to define the terms, conditions and services related to the Owner’s Sustainable 
Objective. If E204–2017 is incorporated into the Agreement, the Owner and Architect shall incorporate the 
completed E204–2017 into the agreements with the consultants and contractors performing services or Work in any 
way associated with the Sustainable Objective. 
 
 


--- PAGE 51 ---
 
 
(List name, legal 
status, address, and 
other contact 
information.) 
§ 1.4 Feasibility 
Phase: 
(if applicable) 
§ 1.5 Schematic 
through Design 
Development Phase: 
§ 1.6 Construction 
Development 
through Closeout 
Services:  
 
 .1The Owner shall 
retain the following 
consultants and 
contractors: 
 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
.2 Consultants 
retained under Basic 
Services: 
 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
.3 Consultants 
retained under 
Supplemental 
Services: 
 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
ARTICLE 2   SERVICES UNDER THIS SERVICE ORDER 
§ 2.1 The Architect’s Services under this Service Order are included within the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement, Exhibit 
A Statement of Work and other incorporated Exhibits.  Exceptions are described below or in an exhibit to this 
Service Order, such as a Scope of Architect’s Services document.  
 
§ 2.1.1 Basic Services Exceptions 
(Describe below any exceptions to the Basic Services the Architect shall provide pursuant to this Service Order or 
state whether the service exceptions are described in documentation attached to this Service Order.) 
 
«Feasibility Phase Exceptions: » 
«Schematic Design through Design Development Exceptions: » 
«Construction Development through Closeout Services Exceptions: » 
 
§ 2.1.2 Supplemental and Additional Services 
(Describe below the Additional Services the Architect shall provide pursuant to this Service Order or state whether 
the services are described in documentation attached to this Service Order.) 
Supplemental Services 
Responsibility 
(Architect, Owner or Not Provided) 


--- PAGE 52 ---
3D scanning services / digital imaging and associated 
travel / management 
 
Field Measurement and Site Due Diligence Report 
 
Civil Engineering 
 
Landscape Design 
 
MEP Engineering 
 
On-site Project Representation 
 
Commissioning 
 
Sustainable Project Services pursuant to Section 3.1.3 
 
Historic Preservation 
 
Other services provided by specialty Consultants 
 
Post Occupancy Evaluation 
 
Other Supplemental Services (listed below): 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Architect shall provide Construction Administration Services exceeding the limits set forth in Exhibit A SOW as 
Additional Services.  
 
«  » 
 
ARTICLE 3   DATE OF COMMENCEMENT AND SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION 
§ 3.1 Unless otherwise provided in an exhibit to this Service Order, the Owner’s anticipated dates for commencement of 
construction and Substantial Completion of the Work are set forth below: 
 
.1 
Commencement of construction date: 
 
«  » 
 
.2 
Substantial Completion date: 
 
«  » 
 
ARTICLE 4   COMPENSATION 
§ 4.1 For Basic Services described under Section 2.1.1, the Owner shall compensate the Architect according to Exhibit E 
and F: 
 
Feasibility Phase: 
(if applicable) 
Schematic Design 
through Design 
Development: 
 
Construction 
Development 
through Closeout 
Services:  
 
.1 Stipulated Sum 
 
(Insert amount) 
 
 
 
 
.2 
Percentage 
Basis 
 
(Insert 
percentage 
value) 
 
N/A 
«  » («  » ) % of the 
Owner’s budget for 
the Cost of the 
Work, as calculated 
in accordance with 
Section 4.4. 
«  » («  » ) % of the 
Owner’s budget for 
the Cost of the 
Work, as calculated 
in accordance with 
Section 4.4. 
.3 
Other 
 
(Describe the 
method of 
compensation) 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 53 ---
 
 
«  » 
 
 
 
 
§ 4.2  For Additional Services described under Section 2.1.2 or in the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement, the Architect shall be 
compensated in accordance with the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement Exhibits E and F as set forth below 
 
«  » 
 
§ 4.3 For Reimbursable Expenses described in the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement, the Architect shall be compensated in 
accordance with the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement as set forth below: 
(Insert amount of compensation . Where the basis of compensation is set forth in an exhibit to this Service Order, such as 
a Scope of Architect’s Services document, list the exhibit below.) 
 
«  » 
 
§ 4.4 When compensation identified in Section 4.1 is on a stipulated sum or a percentage basis, the proportion of 
compensation for each phase of services shall be as follows: 
 
Feasibility Phase 
«Fifteen  » 
percent  ( 
«15  » 
%) 
Schematic Design Phase 
«Fifteen  » 
percent  ( 
«15  » 
%) 
Design Development Phase 
«Twenty-five  » 
percent  ( 
«25  » 
%) 
Construction Documents 
Phase 
«Twenty-five » 
percent  ( 
«25  » 
%) 
Construction Phase 
«Twenty-five  » 
percent  ( 
«25  » 
%) 
   
 
 
 
 
Total Basic Compensation  
one hundred  
percent  ( 
100  
%) 
 
 
 
 
 
Compensation paid in previous progress payments shall not be adjusted based on subsequent updates to the Owner’s 
budget for the Cost of the Work. 
 
ARTICLE 5   INSURANCE 
§ 5.1 Insurance shall be in accordance with section 3.3 of the AIA B 121-2018 Agreement. 
ARTICLE 6   PARTY REPRESENTATIVES 
§ 6.1 The Owner identifies the following representative in accordance with Section 1.4.1 of the AIA B 121-2018 
Agreement: 
(List name, address, and other information.) 
 
«UHG Design Experience Regional Representative: _______________________ 
«UHG Regional Project Management Representative: ________________________ ___ 
 
§ 6.2 The Architect identifies the following representative in accordance with Section 1.5.1 of the AIA B 121-2018 
Agreement: 
(List name, address, and other information.) 
 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
«  » 
 
ARTICLE 7   ATTACHMENTS AND EXHIBITS 
§ 7.1 The following attachments and exhibits, if any, are incorporated herein by reference: 
.1 
AIA Document, B121TM-2018, Standard Form of Master Agreement Between Owner and Architect for 
Services provided under multiple Service Orders and all incorporated Exhibits. 
.2 
Other Exhibits incorporated into this Agreement: 


--- PAGE 54 ---
 
(Clearly identify any other exhibits incorporated into this Agreement.) 
 
«  » 
 
.3 
Other documents: 
 
(List other documents, if any, including additional scopes of service forming part of this Service Order.) 
 
«  » 
 
This Service Order entered into as of the day and year first written above. 
 
 
   
 
   
ON BEHALF OF THE OWNER (Signature) 
 
ARCHITECT (Signature) 
«Design Experience Regional Representative» 
 
«  »«  » 
and 
 
(Printed name, title, and license number, if required) 
 
   
ON BEHALF OF THE OWNER (Signature) 
«Project Management Regional Representative» 
(Printed name and title) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 55 ---
EXHIBIT C 
Glossary of Terms 
 
Term 
Definition 
Design Experience 
Owner’s internal team responsible for overseeing the creation, application and 
ongoing maintenance of internal Owner design and construction guidelines. The 
team focuses on transforming experiences by collaborating with leaders and 
stakeholders to craft solutions that drive engagement and foster a culture of 
innovation. 
Designated Representative 
Owner’s 3rd party representative and a member of Owner’s team responsible for 
project execution; authorized to act for or on the Owner’s behalf.  
Furniture Provider 
Furniture dealership responsible for delivery of furniture products and installation 
on projects. Alliance Partner and member of the Integrated Delivery Process. 
End-to-End  
A comprehensive workflow from initiation stage to final delivery. Roles, 
responsibilities, feasibility, and processes are defined and documented. Contributing 
functional team members have equal participation and accountability in the delivery 
of a project.  
Integrated Projects 
Major real estate projects that have a Real Estate Project Manager assigned and 
require a larger scope of services in excess of $50K.   
Preliminary Floor Plan (PFP)
 
 
 
A schematic design level floor plan for Design Experience and Business review. This 
must be approved in order to move on to Design Development. 
Prime Architect 
Provide integrated, high quality, comprehensive architectural and building systems 
design services. Coordinates all architectural services for the overall design.   
Project Authorization Form (PAF) 
Authorization form required on a per project basis to outline required services and 
contracted rates. The form is completed by Supplier and approved by the Owner or 
Designated Representative. 
Project Definition Document (PDD) A service engagement document which is required to engage Architectural Services. 
Form is completed by the Owner or Designated Representative and provided to 
Firm. Used to notify Firm of a new project.  It provides project information such as 
scope of work, estimated occupancy date, square footage, critical notes for the Firm 
on what will be needed to execute the project, project team contacts, etc. 
Project Manager (PM) 
The individual assigned to direct the activities and oversee management of each 
project.  The Project Manager may be an employee or Contractor of either Owner or 
Owner’s Real Estate Management Partner. 
Real Estate Partner (REP)  
Member of the Integrated Delivery Process. Aligned with Business to determine 
Business’s real estate needs and project scope. Translates Business’s need and 
project scope to other members of the Integrated Delivery Process to deliver real 
estate projects. 
Summary of Requirements (SOR) 
A document that contains a high-level project scope. This document will be utilized 
by the Firm to create the Business’s Program. Form is completed by the Owner or 
Designated Representative and provide to Firm. 
Key Personnel 
Include Supplier staff designated to the performance of key service delivery 
functions. 
Purchase Order (PO) 
A formal request to purchase products or services from the Firm.  Completed and 
approved by the Owner or Designated Representative. 


--- PAGE 56 ---
Local Service Provider (LSP) 
The Subcontractor to Supplier who performs the detailed services. 
Optum Rx Pharmacy Licensing 
Plans 
 
A floor plan quantifying the necessary licensing requirements to satisfy business 
needs as defined by Optum Rx to obtain state licensure to dispense 
pharmaceuticals. 
National Holidays 
 
Include New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving 
plus the Friday after Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. 
Work Order (WO) 
 
A written, verbal or electronic request by UHS for Services which shall be deemed to 
incorporate all provisions of this SOW.  
Critical Services 
 
Critical products and services are fundamental to the daily operations of the 
environments, ensuring that employees can perform their tasks efficiently and that 
patients receive the necessary care and comfort. Examples may include but are not 
limited to workstations, office chairs, filing cabinets and storage units, tables and 
chairs, waiting and exam furniture.  
Business Days (BD) 
Monday – Friday, excluding holidays. 
“Approval" or "Approved" 
 
The formal sign-off by Owner or its Designated Representative, after the 
incorporation of comments, corrections, and revisions. Documents may be 
“approved” electronically via e-mail. Such approval shall include the referenced 
document as an attachment. 
Disengagement Assistance 
 
The activities, information, and other assistance that Owner requests from Firm to 
enable an orderly transfer of Services from Firm to Owner or its Designated 
Representative without interruption or adverse effect to Owner. 
Transaction Manager (TM)
 
 
Member of the Integrated Delivery Process responsible for real estate transactions. 
Occupancy Management (OM) 
 
 
Party responsible for space allocations and occupancy planning. 
The Contract Documents 
The Contract Documents are enumerated in the Agreement between the Owner and 
Contractor (hereinafter the Agreement) and consist of the Agreement, Conditions of 
the Contract (General, Supplementary and other Conditions), Drawings, 
Specifications, Addenda issued prior to execution of the Contract, other documents 
listed in the Agreement, and Modifications issued after execution of the Contract. A 
Modification is (1) a written amendment to the Contract signed by both parties, (2) 
a Change Order, (3) a Construction Change Directive, or (4) a written order for a 
minor change in the Work issued by the Architect. Unless specifically enumerated in 
the Agreement, the Contract Documents do not include the advertisement or 
invitation to bid, Instructions to Bidders, sample forms, other information furnished 
by the Owner in anticipation of receiving bids or proposals, the Contractor’s bid or 
proposal, or portions of Addenda relating to bidding or proposal requirements. 
 
The Contract 
The Contract Documents form the Contract for Construction. The Contract 
represents the entire and integrated agreement between the parties hereto and 
supersedes prior negotiations, representations, or agreements, either written or 
oral. The Contract may be amended or modified only by a Modification. The 
Contract Documents shall not be construed to create a contractual relationship of 
any kind (1) between the Contractor and the Architect or the Architect’s 
consultants, (2) between the Owner and a Subcontractor or a Sub-subcontractor, (3) 
between the Owner and the Architect or the Architect’s consultants, or (4) between 
any persons or entities other than the Owner and the Contractor. The Architect 


--- PAGE 57 ---
shall, however, be entitled to performance and enforcement of obligations under 
the Contract intended to facilitate performance of the Architect’s duties 
The Work 
The term “Work” means the construction and services required by the Contract 
Documents, whether completed or partially completed, and includes all other labor, 
materials, equipment, and services provided or to be provided by the Contractor to 
fulfill the Contractor’s obligations. The Work may constitute the whole or a part of 
the Project. 
The Project 
The Project is the total construction of which the Work performed under the 
Contract Documents may be the whole or a part and which may include 
construction by the Owner and by Separate Contractors. 
The Drawings 
The Drawings are the graphic and pictorial portions of the Contract Documents 
showing the design, location and dimensions of the Work, generally including plans, 
elevations, sections, details, schedules, and diagrams. 
The Specifications 
The Specifications are that portion of the Contract Documents consisting of the 
written requirements for materials, equipment, systems, standards and 
workmanship for the Work, and performance of related services. 
Instruments of Service 
Instruments of Service are representations, in any medium of expression now 
known or later developed, of the tangible and intangible creative work performed 
by the Architect and the Architect’s consultants under their respective professional 
services agreements. Instruments of Service may include, without limitation, 
studies, surveys, models, sketches, drawings, specifications, and other similar 
materials. 
 


--- PAGE 58 ---
Customer 
Page 1 of 
Rev 
 
PROJECT TYPE DEFINITIONS 
 
Term 
Definition 
Consolidation 
Existing location that will be relocated—with or without a growth component of two 
(2) or more clinical spaces into one (1) new clinical space. 
Contractions 
Existing location that decreases its footprint; remodel work is possible but not 
always required depending upon the business requirements for the remaining space. 
Expansion 
Existing location that increases its footprint; remodel work is possible but not always 
required depending upon the business requirements for the space. 
Flash Projects 
Rx Projects that meet any of the following: $1M or more in capital, 50K sq. ft. or 
more, high visibility and/or impact. 
Infrastructure 
 
Owner locations requiring modifications to the existing infrastructure including but 
not limited to Energy/Sustainability, Generator/UPS, and HVAC. 
Infrastructure Projects may include, but are not limited to: 
• 
Mechanical system upgrades or replacements. 
• 
Electrical system upgrades or replacements (including Lighting upgrades). 
• 
Electronics safety and security. 
• 
Exterior building upgrades or renovations. 
• 
Sustainability/Energy Efficiency projects. 
New Site 
Growth into a building or location where Owner services do not currently exist; 
could be first generation shell space, an office environment being converted to a 
clinical space, or a clinical space being renovated for specific Owner business 
requirements. The new site can be a Tenant Fit out or a Ground Up facility. 
One-off
 
 
Owner site where the design approach falls outside of current Design 
Guidelines. Project spaces include but may not be limited to: Office, Clinical, 
Retail, Innovation Centers, International, Infrastructure or others as 
approved by Design Experience. 
one-off Projects and Services are where the design approach falls outside of Owner’s 
current Design Guidelines.  
Such projects have unusual parameters of size, complexity, quality, or timeframe. 
 
Refresh 
An existing Owner location where typically the lease is being extended and minor 
work is done that would not require a building permit, to include new flooring, 
repainted walls, new furniture, etc. Or an existing Owner location requiring people 
and equipment moves but no construction. 
Remodel/ Renovation 
Existing location where the extent of the work would require a building permit and 
would include some construction due to changes in floor plan, work on mechanical, 
electrical and/or plumbing systems, voice/data systems, ceiling work, and/or 
casework replacement. 
Relocation 
Moving a Owner's existing location to a different building or location where Owner 
services do not currently exist; could be first generation shell space, an office 
environment being converted to a clinical space, or a clinical space being renovated 
for specific Owner business requirements. 
Split-Relocation 
Moving a Owner's existing location to two or more different buildings or locations 
where Owner services do not currently exist; could be first generation shell spaces, 


--- PAGE 59 ---
Customer 
Page 2 of 
Rev 
 
office environments being converted to clinical spaces or clinical spaces being 
renovated for specific Owner business requirements. 
ASSET TYPE DEFINITIONS 
 
Space Tier 3 
Clinical Operational Definition 
Aesthetics 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related 
to aesthetics. Includes but is not limited to treatments to skin related to 
burns, reconstructive surgeries, and other related issues. 
Allergy/Immunology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
allergy and immunology. Includes but is not limited to management of 
disorders involving immune system conditions (asthma, anaphylaxis, rhinitis, 
and adverse reactions to drugs, food, and insect stings) and immune deficiency 
diseases. 
Anti-Coagulation 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related 
to blood clotting disorders, blood clots, and may or may not be on anti-
coagulant medications. Includes but is not limited to Coumadin/Warfarin. 
Audiology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
audiology. Includes but is not limited to the evaluation of hearing defects and 
the rehabilitation and therapy of those who have impaired hearing. 
Breast Care 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
breast-related conditions such as fibroids, cysts, noncancerous tumors, and 
infections (example: mastitis). Includes but is not limited to mammography, 
treatment for breast cancer, breast infections, noncancerous tumors. 
Cardiology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
cardiology. Includes but is not limited to the study, diagnosis, and treatment of 
diseases of the heart and blood vessels. Includes but is not limited to 
treatment of cardiac arrhythmia and echocardiography. Excludes 
cardiovascular surgery. 
Cardiovascular 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the heart and the blood vessels as a unified bodily system. Includes but is not 
limited to the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disorders of the heart 
and vascular system and treatment of vascular diseases. 
Chiropractic 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
disorders of the musculoskeletal system and nervous system and their effects 
on overall health. 
Includes but is not limited to manipulation of the spinal column and other body 
structures. 


--- PAGE 60 ---
Customer 
Page 3 of 
Rev 
 
Community Center/Lifestyle 
Center 
Space in which patient/member is seen and receives services related to overall 
enhancement of the health of patient/members ages 55+. Includes 
patient/member meetings for social and recreational services and activities, 
wellness checks, and medical consultation. Excludes medical treatments. 
Dermatology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
dermatology. Includes but is not limited to diagnosis and medical/surgical 
management of diseases of the skin, hair and nails, and mucous membranes. 
Excludes surgery. 
Emergency Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
immediate decision making and action to prevent death or further disability, 
which 
may or may not be within a hospital setting. 
Endocrinology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
endocrinology and the disorders that are caused by abnormal levels of 
hormones that are secreted by glands such as the pituitary, thyroid, adrenals, 
ovaries, testes, and pancreas. Includes but is not limited to diagnosis and 
treatment of diabetes. 
Endoscopy 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
an endoscopic procedure. Includes but is not limited to the endoscopic 
treatment of peptic ulcers, polyps, cancers, and blockages. 
Gastroenterology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnostics and treatment of stomach, esophagus, small and large intestine, 
colon, rectum, anal canal, and perianal area including the organs and tissues 
related with primary intestinal diseases and biliary system conditions. 
Geriatrics 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the aging process and includes diagnostics, therapeutic, preventive, and 
rehabilitative aspects of illness in the elderly. 
Hand 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnostics, treatment, and therapy to reduce pain and restore hand 
function. 
Hematology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
diseases of the blood, spleen, and lymph. Includes but is not limited to 
conditions such as anemia, clotting disorders, sickle cell disease, hemophilia, 
leukemia, lymphoma, and patients using Coumadin/Warfarin/anti- coagulation. 
Home Healthcare 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services in-home 
clinical medical and therapy care for homebound patients and those with acute 
illnesses. Includes but is not limited to house calls & training/pool float nurses. 


--- PAGE 61 ---
Customer 
Page 4 of 
Rev 
 
Hospice and Palliative 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services focused on 
relief from the symptoms and stress of a life threatening or life limiting illness to 
improve quality of life for both the patient and the family. 
Imaging 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
imaging and radiology. Includes but is not limited to echocardiography, 
mammography, ultrasound, X- ray, CAT scan, and MRI. 
Infectious Disease 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of infectious diseases. 
Infusion 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services focused on 
the administration of medication through non-oral routes, such as intravenously 
or subcutaneously. 
Laboratory 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that is 
equipped for research, clinical and pathology tests, analysis of test results, and 
communication with physicians or healthcare providers for patient care, 
diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of disease. 
Lymphedema 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
specializes in diagnosis, treatment, surgical or non-surgical treatment, and 
inpatient/outpatient rehabilitation related to build-up of lymph fluid, most 
frequently in the arms or legs. 
Medication Dispensary 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that offers 
a point of care medication dispensary service allowing patients to receive 
prescribed medications on-site, without a separate trip to the pharmacy. Space 
has no pharmacist on staff. 
Nephrology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the kidney, high blood pressure, fluid and mineral balance, and dialysis of body 
wastes due to loss of kidney function. Includes but is not limited to treatment of 
kidney diseases such as end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and dialysis. 
Neurology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
disorders of the nervous system, including diagnosis and treatment involving 
both the central and peripheral nervous systems. Includes but is not limited to 
electro-neuro machines, nerve testing. 
Nuclear Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services using 
radioactive materials, called radiopharmaceuticals, to diagnose and treat 
disease. 
Nutrition 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
focuses on the effects of nutrition on human health, specifically pertaining to 
the correct balance of foods, vitamins, and minerals. Includes but is not limited 
to treatments by nutritionists and dieticians. 


--- PAGE 62 ---
Customer 
Page 5 of 
Rev 
 
Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
focuses on the health of women before, during, and after childbearing years, 
diagnosing and treating conditions of the reproductive system and associated 
disorders. Subspecialty to include MVA Clinic (Manual Vacuum Aspiration) 
Occupational Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
focuses on the prevention and management of occupational and environmental 
injury, illness and disability, and promotion of health and productivity of 
workers, their families, and communities. Includes but is not limited to 
environment health and safety (EHS) 
Oncology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
specialize in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of cancer. Includes but is 
not limited to cancers of the blood, bone, breast, and organs. 
Ophthalmology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services specializing 
in the complete range of eye and vision care, including diagnostic, treatment, 
and the surgical or non- surgical care of eye conditions and diseases. Includes 
but is not limited to diagnosis/treatment of glaucoma, cataracts. 
Optometry 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
eye exams to identify visual defects and prescribe corrective lenses. Includes but 
is not limited to vision exams, eye care. Excludes surgery. 
Orthopedics 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnosis and treatment pertaining to disorders of the bones, joints, 
ligaments, tendons, and muscles. Includes but is not limited to casting or x-ray. 
Excludes surgery. 
Otolaryngology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnosis and disorder of the ear, nose, and throat, as well as conditions 
affecting the head and neck. Includes but is not limited to Ear, Nose and Throat 
(ENT) 
Pain Management 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services from a 
physician with special training in evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of all 
different types of pain as resulting from a wide spectrum of disorders including 
acute pain, chronic pain and cancer pain or combination. 
Pathology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related 
from a physician that specializes in the study of disease. 
Pediatrics 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives specialized care of 
infants, children, and adolescents. 
Pharmacy 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services primarily 
for the preparation and dispensing of medicinal drugs. Includes but is not 
limited to medical dispensaries. Space is regulated by Board of Pharmacy and 
there is a pharmacist on staff. 


--- PAGE 63 ---
Customer 
Page 6 of 
Rev 
 
Phlebotomy 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services primarily 
to draw blood. 
Physiatry 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disabling diseases, disorders, and 
injuries by physical means. Includes electrotherapy, therapeutic exercise, or 
pharmaceutical pain control. 
Physical Therapy 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
therapy for the preservation, enhancement, or restoration of movement and 
physical function by therapeutic exercise, physical modalities (such as massage 
and electrotherapy), assistive devices, and patient education and training. 
Podiatry 
Location that specializes in the medical care and treatment of the foot. Includes 
but is not limited to diabetic foot care. 
Primary Care/Family Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
integrated care and treating the patient (of any age) as a whole. Includes but is 
not limited to adult medicine, internal medicine, family medicine, 
comprehensive wellness, general practice, comprehensive health care, 
treatment of most ailments. 
Psychiatry 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
treating mental, emotional, or behavioral disorders which can include the use of 
prescribed medications. 
Psychology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the treatment of mental, emotional, and behavioral disorders without the use 
of prescribed medications. 
Pulmonology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of conditions that affect the lungs and 
respiratory tract. Includes but not limited to on-sight breathing tests to measure 
lung capacity. 
Rheumatology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
non-surgical treatment of autoimmune, inflammatory, or other musculoskeletal 
conditions such as arthritis. 
Sleep Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the diagnoses and therapy of sleep disturbances and disorders. 
Sports Medicine 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the treatment of injuries resulting from athletic activities. 
Surgery – Bariatric 
Space in which bariatric surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Breast 
Space in which breast surgery is performed. 
Surgery - Cosmetic/Plastic 
Space in which cosmetic and/or plastic surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Dermatological 
Space in which dermatological surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Emergency 
Space in which emergency surgery is performed. 
 
 


--- PAGE 64 ---
Customer 
Page 7 of 
Rev 
 
Surgery – Eye 
Space in which eye (also known as ocular) surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Joint 
Space in which joint surgery is performed. Excludes joint replacement surgery, 
which is "Surgery - Orthopedic." 
Surgery – Orthopedic 
Space in which orthopedic surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Otolaryngology 
Space in which otolaryngology (also known as ear, nose, and throat or ENT) 
surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Spinal 
Space in which spinal surgery is performed. 
Surgery – Urologic 
Space in which urologic surgery is performed. 
Urgent Care 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services that 
provide no appointment treatment for nonlife- threatening acute illnesses and 
injuries that occur on a day-to- day basis. Includes but is not limited to 
immediate, walk-in care. 
Urology 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services which 
focus on the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the urinary system in both 
men and women and the reproductive system in men. 
Wound Care 
Space in which patient/member is seen, treated, or receives services related to 
the evaluation and treatment of non- healing wounds. 
 
 
Space Tier 2 
OptumRx Pharmacy Operational Definition 
Dispensing 
Special purpose office facilities where incoming Home Delivery or Specialty 
pharmaceutical orders are received and fulfilled for delivery in adjoining 
industrial/warehouse space to meet specific operational or regulatory 
requirements. Pharmacy 
license exists. 
Front End 
Administrative support sites for pharmacy. Pharmacy license exists, but no 
drugs on-site. Pharmacist-in-charge present. 
Infusion 
Property dedicated to the compounding of pharmaceuticals in clean room 
environments and/or pharmaceuticals administered to patients via infusion 
suites. Pharmacy license exists. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 65 ---
Customer 
Page 8 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBT D 
Intentionally Omitted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 66 ---
Customer 
Page 9 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT E 
New Site, Expansion, Large Renovation, and Relocation Fees 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 67 ---
Customer 
Page 10 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 68 ---
Customer 
Page 11 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT F 
Small Remodels, Contraction, or Split Relocation Project Fees 
Price per Square foot by project type and project size (of affected project area) for the Basic Services that 
may be required during the below listed project delivery types 
All projects that exceed 10,000 SF of affected area should be priced within the percentage basis in Exhibit E 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 69 ---
Customer 
Page 12 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 70 ---
Customer 
Page 13 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 71 ---
Customer 
Page 14 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT G  
Optum Rx SCOPE OF WORK  
 
 
Intentionally Omitted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 72 ---
Customer 
Page 15 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT H  
INNOVATION PARTNER SCOPE OF WORK and FEES 
 
Intentionally Omitted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 73 ---
Customer 
Page 16 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT I 
DRAWING MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 74 ---
Customer 
Page 17 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 75 ---
Customer 
Page 18 of 
Rev 
 
Mapping Hierarchy 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 76 ---
Customer 
Page 19 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 77 ---
Customer 
Page 20 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 78 ---
Customer 
Page 21 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 79 ---
Customer 
Page 22 of 
Rev 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 80 ---
Customer 
Page 23 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT J 
FEE REPORTING SAMPLE 
Billing Category 
Basic Services per SOW 
 
Lump Sum 
 
Percentage Based 
 
Billing Category 


--- PAGE 81 ---
Customer 
Page 24 of 
Rev 
 
Other Services 
 
Consultant Fees 
 
Reimbursable Expenses 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 82 ---
Customer 
Page 25 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT K 
SECURITY STANDARDS 
Security Vulnerability and Incident Communications 
The following contact details should be used for any notifications of security vulnerabilities and security incidents: 
Phone: Security Incident Response (SIR) Hotline at 888-255-2554 
Email: SIRG@optum.com 
Definitions 
 
UHS 
United Healthcare Services, Inc., a Minnesota corporation, together with its 
affiliates. 
UHS Information 
means information provided by or on behalf of UHS or processed by Vendor on 
behalf of UHS, that is one of the following: (i) protected health information (as 
defined by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act); (ii) non- 
public personal information (as defined by the Federal Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act); (iii) personal data (as defined by the EU’s General Data Protection 
Regulations); (iv) cardholder data (as defined by the Payment Card Industry 
Data Security Standard); or (v) other personally identifiable information about 
individuals including social security numbers. UHSUHS. 
UHS Information Systems 
UHS’s (including its affiliates and other vendors’) IT and network systems, 
including cloud systems and devices. 
Vendor 
A provider of Vendor Processing services to UHS, or a service provider 
accessing any UHS Information System, as well as their subcontractors for such 
services. 
Vendor Information Systems 
Vendor’s (including its subcontractors’) IT and network systems, including 
cloud systems and devices, that are used for Vendor Processing, or can be used 
directly or indirectly to access either systems used for Vendor Processing or 
UHS Information Systems 
Vendor Processing 
Any information creation, collection, storage, or processing performed by 
vendor or its subcontractors of UHS Information. 
 
Standards 
The following minimum standards must be met by vendors storing, transmitting, or processing UHS Information or 
accessing UHS Information Systems in addition to any security standards in our agreement. 
 
Segregation 
Vendor must physically or logically segregate UHS Information from other data 
processed by Vendor. 


--- PAGE 83 ---
Customer 
Page 26 of 
Rev 
 
Encryption 
UHS Information must be encrypted in transit and at rest using industry best practice 
standards. 
End Devices 
every end device (e.g., mobile, laptop, or workstation) used to process or store UHS 
Information, or access UHS Information Systems, must: 
• 
be vendor-issued or managed (i.e., not a personal device), 
• 
have up-to-date malware prevention and detection software, 
• 
have a firewall, and 
• 
have full disk encryption. 
Removable Media 
Vendor must maintain controls on End Devices to prevent UHS Information being 
exported to or stored on removable media (e.g., thumb drives, smart cards, or portable 
drives), unless pre-approved by UHS. 
Multi-Factor 
Authentication 
Vendor shall ensure that access to UHS Information, Vendor Information Systems, and 
endpoints to UHS Information Systems use multi-factor authentication that includes at 
least two of the three following factors: something the user knows, something the user 
has, and something the user is. 
Portal Security 
Vendor shall implement and maintain the following portal security controls for web and 
mobile applications that interact with or contain UHS Information: (a) multi-factor 
authentication; (b) BOT activity monitoring and logging; and (c) risk-based 
authentication. 
Secure Deletion 
Any UHS Information to be deleted under our agreement must be securely deleted as 
follows: 
• 
Hard copies must be destroyed by shredding or otherwise so that they cannot 
be reconstructed. 
• 
Electronic copies must be deleted and overwritten so that they cannot be 
retrieved or reconstructed. 
• 
Vendor Information Systems equipment that held UHS Information must be 
physically destroyed, degaussed or overwritten in accordance with NIST 
Special Publication 800-88 before being disposed of or used for another 
purpose. 
Training & 
Personnel 
All vendor personnel supporting Vendor Processing must receive training at least 
annually on industry standard security practices, applicable privacy laws and 
regulations, and their responsibilities for protecting UHS Information. 
If a vendor user ceases to be an employee or contractor of vendor or its subcontractor, 
or otherwise involved in delivering the services, then vendor shall both (a) revoke 
access to UHS Information, and (b) if the user has access to the UHS Information 
Systems, either revoke access to the UHS Information Systems if controlled by vendor 
or otherwise notify UHS, each within one business day of the user no longer requiring 
access or immediately if the user has been involuntarily terminated. 


--- PAGE 84 ---
Customer 
Page 27 of 
Rev 
 
Infrastructure 
Protection 
Vendor must maintain industry standard controls for the Vendor Information Systems 
to protect the confidentiality, integrity, availability, and security of UHS Information, 
including: 
• 
physical security controls (including facility and environmental controls) to 
prevent unauthorized physical access to Vendor Information Systems and 
areas in which UHS Information is stored or processed, 
• 
implementing router filters, firewalls, and intrusion detection and prevention 
systems to restrict access from public networks to Vendor Information 
Systems, 
• 
implementing data loss mechanisms to prevent UHS Information from being 
moved to unauthorized network locations, 
• 
running up-to-date malware prevention and detection software on Vendor 
Information Systems, 
• 
using only applications and operating systems that are still supported by the 
OEM, 
• 
only using software and libraries that are being maintained, 
• 
subscribing to receive, and promptly applying, security patches to Vendor 
Information Systems, 
• 
maintaining a register of Vendor Information Systems and tracking of the 
receipt, removal and transfer of Vendor Information Systems, and 
• 
reviewing the security controls at least annually. 
Transmitting UHS 
Information 
Vendor must ensure that the electronic transmission or transport on media of UHS 
Information uses encryption and is performed in a secure manner to prevent 
unauthorized access or modification. 
Cloud Computing 
Vendor must notify UHS in advance before using any cloud or shared hosted facilities to 
store or process UHS Information. 
Software 
Development 
If vendor performs software development as part of its services for UHS, vendor must: 
• 
follow secure coding and source code management practices, including testing 
and change management, 
• 
use separate development and production environments, 
• 
perform code inspections to identify vulnerabilities and malicious code, 
• 
ensure that backdoors are not included in the software, and 
• 
ensure that processes and documented and implemented for vulnerability 
management, patching, and verification of security controls before connecting 
to production networks. 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 85 ---
Customer 
Page 28 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT L 
SUPPLIER CODE OF CONDUCT 
 
UnitedHealth Group is a well-diversified health and well-being company providing products and services through 
two distinct platforms: UnitedHealthcare, which provides health care coverage and benefit services; and Optum, 
which provides information and technology-enabled health services. 
 
UnitedHealth Group and its subsidiaries and affiliates around the world (“we” or “the Company”), is a mission-
driven company, committed to helping people live healthier lives and helping to make the health care system work 
better for everyone. Our work is guided by six values that best describe how we aspire to conduct ourselves and 
our business: Integrity, Compassion, Inclusion, Relationships, Innovation and Performance. 
 
Integrity is the foundation for each of the five other values and everything we do at UnitedHealth Group. We are 
committed to operating under the highest ethical standards of integrity, honesty, respect, responsibility and 
compliance with the laws and regulations that govern our business activities around the world. Our customers 
expect this commitment from us and we expect the same from the individuals and entities we engage in supporting 
our business activities. 
 
We seek to establish and maintain strong business relationships in alignment with our values and commitments. 
This Supplier Code of Conduct (“the Code”) is a set of standards for ethical and legal business practices by which we 
require and expect our Business Partners (Suppliers) to abide by when conducting any business activities with us or 
on our behalf. When doing business with UnitedHealth Group, our affiliates, and subsidiaries, we expect our 
Suppliers to uphold the same ethical, social, and environmental standards in their own operations, supply base, and 
business relationships, in accordance with applicable local law or regulation. 
 
For purposes of this Code, Supplier (“you”) means an individual or entity that provides us services and/or goods, 
that provides services and/or goods to others on our behalf, or that has a business partnership with us. For 
purposes of this Code, “Associate” means director, employee, agent, contractor, subcontractor, or any other 
individual or entity related to the Supplier in conducting any and all business activities with us or on our behalf. 
 
LABOR PRACTICES AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
We are committed to applying and promoting socially responsible practices that respect and protect the personal 
dignity, privacy, and rights of all people we employ, do business with, and serve.We expect our Suppliers to respect 
all internationally recognized human rights1 in their own operations, supply base, and business relationships in 
keeping with the spirit of the United Nations Guiding Principles for Business and Human Rights2 (UN Guiding 
Principles) and the International Labor Organization’s Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work3 
(ILO Declaration). 
Discrimination, Harassment or Abuse 
• 
You shall not engage in or tolerate any discriminatory conduct against any person on the basis of any 
condition or characteristic, including race, age, gender, gender identity and/or expression, sexual 
orientation, ethnicity, disability, religion, political affiliation, union membership, pregnancy, or 
marital status, which is protected by law. 
• 
You shall not use or tolerate the use of any form of physical, sexual, psychological or verbal abuse, 
coercion or threats, or any form of harassment. 


--- PAGE 86 ---
Customer 
Page 29 of 
Rev 
 
• 
You shall comply with all applicable nondiscrimination laws and regulations and must appropriately 
address any alleged unacceptable treatment against your Associates. 
• 
You shall provide fair and equal treatment in the areas of recruitment, hiring, promotion, discharge, 
and all other terms and conditions of work. 
Forced Labor 
• 
You shall not use or tolerate the use of any illegal form of forced labor, including, bonded, 
indentured or involuntary prison labor, or engage in any form of slavery or human trafficking. 
• 
You shall not use or purchase supplies or materials that are knowingly produced using any illegal 
form of forced labor. 
• 
You shall respect your Associates’ freedom of movement and termination of employment or 
business relations at will. 
Underage Labor 
• 
You shall comply with all age-related working restrictions defined by applicable laws and regulations 
and must not employ anyone who is under the legal working age. 
Working Hours and Compensation 
• 
You shall not require your Associates to work more than the maximum number of hours of daily 
labor set by applicable laws and regulations. 
• 
You shall provide your Associates wages and benefits that meet or exceed applicable laws 
and regulations, collective bargaining agreements and industry standards. 
• 
You shall compensate your Associates for overtime hours, if applicable, at or above the rate required 
by applicable laws. 
 
1 “Internationally recognized human rights” are understood, at a minimum, as those expressed in the International 
Bill of Human Rights and the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work. 
2 UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights 
3 ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work 
Health and Safety 
• 
You shall provide your Associates a safe and healthy work environment by fully complying with all 
applicable health and safety laws, regulations, and standards. 
• 
You shall take proactive measures that support accident prevention and minimize health risk 
exposure, including the provision of appropriate training and awareness to your Associates. 
• 
While on our sites and within our facilities you shall abide by our health and safety policies, safeguard 
your Associates, and take all reasonable precautions to protect the health and well-being of our 
employees, guests, and surrounding communities affected by our activities. 
• 
While on our sites and within our facilities you shall promptly report accidents, injuries, or 
occupational illnesses and unsafe practices or conditions to one of our representatives. 


--- PAGE 87 ---
Customer 
Page 30 of 
Rev 
 
Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining 
• 
You shall recognize, respect, and protect your Associates’ right to freedom of association and 
collective bargaining in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
Inclusive Supply Chain 
• 
We recognize the importance of an inclusive supply chain and are committed to ensuring that 
diversity and inclusion is an integral part of our strategic sourcing and procurement processes. We 
support use of diverse suppliers (defined as a supplier who maintains a valid certification as a minority, 
women, veteran, LGBTQ+, disabled or service-disabled owned business), to the maximum practicable 
opportunity to participate in any subcontracts or orders in support of our business. 
Grievance Mechanism 
You and your Associates are required to speak up and report violations of this Code of Conduct right away. 
 
• 
You shall not retaliate against Associates who report abuse, discrimination, ethical concerns, or other 
violations of law. 
• 
You shall ensure your Associates have awareness of and access to our Compliance & Ethics 
HelpCenter to report grievances. (www.uhghelpcenter.ethicspoint.com). 
ANTI-CORRUPTION AND GOVERNMENT INTERACTIONS 
We are committed to complying with the anti-corruption laws and regulations of every country in which we operate, 
including, but not limited to the United States Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) and the U.K. Anti-Bribery Act. 
We refrain from engaging in any form of corruption or illegal or unethical act to obtain and maintain our business 
and we expect the same from our Suppliers. 
Anti-Bribery 
• 
You shall not engage in or tolerate any kind of bribery and shall not promise, offer, provide, or 
authorize anything of value, including without limitations payments, gifts, travel, meals, 
entertainment, political contributions, and contributions of any kind or nature, such as donations and 
sponsorships or favors, to 
any Government Official to improperly influence any act or decision-making in violation of law. A Government 
Official includes any government officer or employee at any level (international, national, state, or local), a 
Government Official’s family members, employees of any government-owned enterprise, political parties, 
party officials, and any candidate for political office. 
• 
You shall not request, authorize, or tolerate any kind of bribery or any other kind of illegal or unethical 
action from others for us, in our name, on our behalf or any other way related to your business 
activities with us or on our behalf. 
Facilitation Payment 
• 
Facilitation payments are payments made to Government Officials in order to expedite their 
performance of routine, non-discretionary duties or actions (such as processing of licenses). You shall 
not make or authorize, directly or indirectly through others, facilitation payments to Government 
Officials while conducting business activities with us or on our behalf. 


--- PAGE 88 ---
Customer 
Page 31 of 
Rev 
 
Business Courtesies 
• 
While supporting our business, you shall not provide Business Courtesies to Government Officials 
unless previously and expressly authorized by one of our Compliance Representatives. Business 
Courtesies include, without limitations, gifts, entertainment, travel, and meals. 
• 
In those rare situations where you must provide gifts, entertainment, or something of value to 
Government Officials on our behalf, you must seek prior written consent from UHG’s Compliance 
Office and record the transactions accurately on your invoices to UHG so that the purpose and 
amount associated with each transaction is clear. You must not make false, misleading, or incomplete 
entries. This requirement applies to all transactions and expenses, whether or not they are material 
from an accounting perspective. 
 
ETHICAL BUSINESS PRACTICES AND INTERACTIONS 
We are committed to operating under the highest ethical business practices and standards. We seek competitive 
advantages only through legal and ethical business practices. Our business decisions and actions are based on the 
best interests of our Company and not on our personal interests or relationships. 
Conflicts of Interest 
• 
You shall not engage in any activity or relationship that may cause or appear to cause a conflict with 
the interest of our Company while conducting business activities with us or on our behalf. 
• 
Your relationships with others shall not affect your independent and sound judgment in doing 
business with us or on our behalf. 
Business Courtesy 
• 
You shall not make, use, or tolerate the use of Business Courtesies (meals, entertainment, gifts, 
travel, or other items of value) with the purpose of influencing decision-making by our employees, our 
affiliates, and others. 
• 
If you wish to offer a Business Courtesy to any of our employees you must observe the restrictions 
and limitations defined in our internal policies which can be made available to you upon request. 
Our employees are properly trained on such policies and may assist you in case of any questions or 
concerns. Any Business Courtesies, offered or accepted, must comply with applicable laws or 
regulations. 
Insider Trading 
• 
You shall not purchase or sell our Company’s securities (stock, option, etc.) if you have any non-public 
material information about our Company. Non-public material information is information which is 
not available to the general public and which could influence an investor to buy, sell, or hold securities, 
with the objective of gaining profit or advantage in the market. 
• 
You shall not purchase or sell securities (stock, option, etc.) of any other company if you have any 
non- public material information about the other company as a result of your work with us. 
• 
You shall not disclose any non-public material information about our Company or other companies 
which you have obtained as a result of your work with us or on our behalf. 


--- PAGE 89 ---
Customer 
Page 32 of 
Rev 
 
Antitrust 
• 
You shall conduct your business in full compliance with applicable antitrust and fair competition laws 
and regulations designed to protect companies against unfair business practices and to promote a 
competitive economy. 
• 
You shall not engage in or tolerate monopolization, price fixing, price discrimination, or other unfair 
trade practices in violation of applicable antitrust laws. 
• 
You shall exercise caution when interacting with our competitors on our behalf and shall obtain 
approval and guidance from the Company before doing so. 
 
TRADE AND EXPORT CONTROLS 
We are committed to complying with all applicable export, import, and trade laws and regulations in all countries 
in which we do business. 
• 
You shall comply with applicable export, import, and trade laws and regulations when 
transferring products or services nationally and internationally. 
• 
You shall comply with all applicable mandated trade embargoes and economic sanctions. 
• 
You shall not directly or indirectly engage in, tolerate, or support any terrorist activity. 
 
BUSINESS RECORDS 
We are committed to the integrity of our business records and to ensuring that our books, records, accounting, 
and financial reporting are accurate and complete and properly reflect the actual transaction or event recorded. 
• 
You shall maintain accurate and timely financial books, records, and statements pertaining to your 
own business in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. 
• 
Any financial records you submit to us or create on our behalf must be accurate and complete and 
must comply with all applicable industry or professional standards. 
• 
You shall not make false, misleading, or incomplete entries. This requirement applies to all 
transactions and expenses, whether or not they are material from an accounting perspective. 
• 
You shall create, retain, and dispose of business records in full compliance with all applicable legal 
and regulatory requirements. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
We are committed to addressing the negative impacts the changing environment has on human health and climate 
risk management is a key component of our ongoing sustainable procurement activities. Through collective effort 
and long-term commitments with our Suppliers, we aim to minimize our environmental impact and the greenhouse 
gas footprint of our supply chain. 
 
• 
You shall comply with applicable environmental laws and regulations regarding hazardous materials, 
air emissions, waste, and wastewater discharges, including the manufacture, transportation, storage, 
and disposal of such materials. 
• 
You shall conduct your operations applying proper measures to minimize adverse impacts upon 
natural resources, the environment, your Associates, and the community. 
• 
You shall obtain and maintain current any required environmental permits, licenses, and registrations 


--- PAGE 90 ---
Customer 
Page 33 of 
Rev 
 
and comply with operational and reporting requirements. 
• 
We encourage you to make best commercial efforts to track, report, and minimize your greenhouse 
gas emissions associated with your operations and value chain. 
• 
We encourage you to join us in setting greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets that are science- 
based and aligned with limiting global warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. 
• 
We encourage you to engage with your other value chain partners on sustainability and climate-
related issues to cascade and incentivize environmental ambition. 
 
Specific requirements for greenhouse gas emissions data disclosure, reduction targets, and attained 
reductions may be set forth in a separate agreement between the parties if deemed appropriate by 
UnitedHealth Group. 
PROTECTION OF ASSETS, INFORMATION, AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
We are committed to protecting our Company’s assets and confidential and proprietary information. We are 
committed to properly maintaining the privacy and security of all information that we collect, use, or that is 
entrusted to our care. 
• 
You shall take all reasonable efforts and precautions to protect any of our properties and assets 
(including without limitation our intellectual property and confidential information) that you may 
have access to as a result of doing work for us or on our behalf. 
• 
You shall not use our property and assets except as necessary to perform your work for us or on our 
behalf and shall make sure any use is in accordance with any confidentiality, or other contractual 
agreements you have with us. 
• 
You shall only use and disclose our sensitive information you have access to or create as a result of 
your work with us or on our behalf as permitted by law and the contractual agreements you have 
with us. 
• 
You shall ensure to collect, store, and disclose personal information you have access to as a result of 
your work with us or on our behalf as necessary and to the extent required for business purposes, in 
a secure manner appropriate to the sensitivity of the information and applicable law and regulations. 
PROMOTING COMPLIANCE AND ETHICAL CONDUCT 
Ethical Conduct 
We are committed to promoting the highest standards of business practices, ethical behavior, integrity, and 
regulatory compliance. 
• 
You shall apply and promote the highest possible standards of ethical behavior, personal and 
institutional integrity in your interactions with customers, employees, partners, and other 
stakeholders, including governments and the public. 
• 
You shall establish and maintain appropriate policies and processes to promote ethical business 
practices and regulatory compliance by your Associates. The types of policies and processes, such as 
training, monitoring, and auditing, will depend on the business you are in, the type of work you do, 
and the number of employees you have. 
 


--- PAGE 91 ---
Customer 
Page 34 of 
Rev 
 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 
We are committed to the responsible use of artificial intelligence and machine learning systems (“AI/ML Solutions”) 
across their lifecycle. 
 
• 
To achieve this goal, meet the needs of those we serve, and support our business, we strive to ensure 
that AI/ML Solutions are procured, developed, and deployed ethically, responsibly, and in compliance 
with applicable laws, regulations, contracts, our corporate policies, and this Code of Conduct. 
• 
You shall establish and maintain appropriate policies and processes to promote the responsible use 
of AI/ML Solutions you provide or utilize in providing products or services to us. 
• 
You shall cooperate with our efforts to determine if any AI/ML Solution you wish to provide to us, or 
use in connection with providing services to us, complies with our responsible use policies, including 
whether the AI/ML Solution exhibits bias or similar unintended outcomes. 
SUBCONTRACTORS 
You will obtain our written approval prior to engaging any subcontractors to perform any service for or on behalf 
of UnitedHealth Group, unless otherwise stated in a written agreement. You will only use subcontractors or other 
third parties who comply with all applicable laws and regulations, and who adhere to the same standards set forth 
in this code. 
COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
We reserve the right to conduct, or have conducted on our behalf, audits of Supplier facilities and business 
practices in order to monitor your commitment to this Code. 
 
• 
Upon request, you shall provide written documentation of actions undertaken to evidence the 
fulfillment of any and all of the requirements identified in this Code of Conduct. 
• 
Upon receipt of reasonable advance notice, you shall facilitate and fully cooperate with the 
realization of any assessment, audit, or inspection by us, or our representative, of your facilities 
and/or business practices. 
• 
Based on the findings of any such assessment, audit, or inspection, you shall implement timely and 
appropriate corrective measures. 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPORTING 
You shall report any unethical or unlawful conduct related in any way to our business; you may contact your 
representative within our Company or: 
UnitedHealth Group Compliance & Ethics (EthicsOffice@uhg.com); 
UnitedHealth Group International Compliance (InternationalCompliance@uhg.com); The 
Compliance & Ethics HelpCenter (www.uhghelpcenter.ethicspoint.com). 
THE COMPANY RESERVES THE RIGHT TO TERMINATE BUSINESS WITH ANY BUSINESS PARTNER THAT FAILS TO COMPLY 
WITH THIS CODE OR WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS. 
 
 
Revised October 2023 


--- PAGE 92 ---
Customer 
Page 35 of 
Rev 
 
EXHIBIT M 
RESPONSIBLE USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Definitions 
 
AI Solution 
Any AI system, model, or algorithm or any product or service that incorporates 
an AI system, model, or algorithm as a material component of the product or 
service. 
Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) 
A field of computer science that focuses on creating machines that can perform 
tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech 
recognition, decision-making, and language translation. Subfields of AI that are 
included within this definition include, without limitation, machine learning, 
natural language processing, neural networks and Generative AI. 
Generative AI (“GenAI”) 
A subset of AI that can be used to create new content, data, or information, 
including audio, code, images, texts, simulations, and videos. 
Gen AI Solution 
Any GenAI system, model or algorithm or any product or service that incorporates 
a GenAI system, model, or algorithm as a material component of the product or 
service. 
UHS 
United Healthcare Services, Inc., a Minnesota corporation, together with its 
affiliates. 
Vendor 
A provider of an AI Solution to UHS, or a service provider utilizing an AI Solution. 
 
Standards 
The following minimum standards must be met by Vendors providing services to UHS that utilize or include an AI 
Solution in addition to any requirements in our agreement. Upon UHS request, Vendor shall complete an annual 
survey and confirm compliance with the minimum standards. 
 
Industry Best 
Practices 
The AI Solution provided to Customer must be developed in alignment with industry 
best practices including without limitation, the following: 
• 
International Organization for Standardization 42001: 2023 (“ISO 
42001:2023”). 
• 
National Institute for Standards and Technology Artificial Intelligence Risk 
Management Framework (“NIST AI RM Framework”). 
• 
Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development AI Principles 
AI Governance 
Program 
Vendor must implement and maintain a responsible use of AI governance program 
including: 
• 
Comprehensive risk assessments and testing of the AI Solution, at least once 
per calendar year or following any material update, to prevent bias, 
unintended, or other harmful outputs. 


--- PAGE 93 ---
Page 1 of 82 
Rev 12.14 
 
• 
On-going monitoring of the AI Solution after deployment. 
• 
Enterprise-wide policies on the responsible use of AI, including documenting 
potential harmful uses of the AI Solution. 
• 
Retention of all relevant records regarding the validation, testing and ongoing 
operation of the AI Solution 
Training and 
Personnel 
All vendor personnel supporting or utilizing the AI Solution must receive training at 
least annually on industry standard best practices, applicable laws and regulations, and 
the responsible use of the AI Solution. 
Quality of Outputs 
Vendor is responsible for taking reasonable steps to validate the outputs are accurate, 
complete, and unbiased; and the AI model is explainable and subject to human review 
prior to delivery to Customer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE 94 ---
Page 2 of 82 
Rev 12.14 
 
EXHIBIT N 
TRAVEL AND EXPENSE POLICY 
 
Firm's failure to comply with these policies may result in denial of reimbursement for claimed expenses, 
at Owner's option. Personal expenses incurred while traveling are not reimbursable. 
 
Expense Guidelines: 
1. 
Air Transportation 
(a) All domestic business air travel will be by coach/economy class. Upgrades are allowed at Firm's 
expense as long as the lowest logical fare is utilized. 
(b) When making airline reservations, Firm is required to accept flights that utilize "lowest logical 
fare" routing, as such term is defined and/or generally used in the travel industry. Firm 
personnel will be required to take connecting flights, direct flights or go to an alternate airport 
if the routing does not increase the one-way total elapsed trip time by more than two (2) hours 
(e.g., two (2) hours before or after requested departure or arrival time); exceptions to utilizing 
lowest logical fare routing must be approved by Owner in advance. 
(c) Frequent Flyer program benefits must in no way influence flight selection. 
(d) Firm must make travel reservations for its personnel as soon as they are made aware of the 
need for travel to take advantage of lower airfares. 
(e) E-tickets should be used whenever possible in place of pre-paid tickets to reduce costs. 
(f) Owner does not reimburse costs of flying private aircraft. 
2. 
Car Rental and Parking 
(a) Firm personnel may rent a car of compact or intermediate size. Three (3) or more Firm 
personnel traveling together may rent a full size vehicle. 
(b) Car rentals should be utilized only when the cost of the rental car is more cost effective than 
the usage of hotel transportation, personal vehicles, airline, rail travel or taxi. 
(c) Every reasonable effort must be made to return the rental car to the original rental location 
(unless approved in advance for a one way rental). Cars must be returned on time to avoid 
additional hourly charges (late fees begin to accrue after a 1-hour grace period}, and with a 
full tank of gas. 
(d} Parking will be reimbursed up to a reasonable level. 
3. 
Ground Transportation 
(a) Firm personnel are expected to use the most economical ground transportation appropriate 
under the circumstances and should generally use the following, in this order of desirability: 
(b) Courtesy cars/Hotel shuttle services; 
(c) Airport limousine or buses; and 
(d) Taxis. 
4. 
Lodging 
(a) Firm personnel are expected to use the most economical lodging appropriate under the 
circumstances, subject to the following additional guidelines: 
(b) Firm will not be reimbursed for "no-show" charges. 
(c) Frequent Guest programs may in no way influence hotel choice. 


--- PAGE 95 ---
Page 3 of 82 
Rev 12.14 
 
(d) No hotel phone calls or internet charges will be reimbursed. 
5. 
Meals 
(a) Aggregate daily individual meal expenses may not exceed $40. 
(b) Meals will be reimbursed for actual expense. 
(c) A receipt must be provided with the expense report. 
(d) Tear Tabs are not, under any circumstances, acceptable meal receipts. 
Expense Report Submission: 
The following original documentation, at a minimum, is required for all expenditures: 
 
 
